=head1 Perl 6 Summary for 2005-01-03 through 2005-01-11

Welcome to another Perl 6 summary.  In this summary, we will explore such thrilling issues as multi-dimensional slices of Chinese food.  After all, the amount of sauce any piece of Chinese food can absorb is proportional to its surface area, which is a direct function of the number of dimensions in which it is sliced (provided that we ignore degenerate cases like fractal cuts of Peking duck).

=head2 Perl 6 Language

=head3 1x6 vs 6

Craig DeForest wondered how to disambiguate a 1x6 2D array slice from a 6 element 1D array slice.  He suggested a syntax inspired by PDL.  Larry admitted to not having examined this particular issue and stated that he was open to suggestions.  Some suggestions arrived.

L<http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/96503cca52fd9c56/143ada0ec06bb3d6?_done=%2Fgroup%2Fperl.perl6.language%3F&_doneTitle=Back+to+topics&_doneTitle=Back&&d#143ada0ec06bb3d6>



=head3 code as comment

Stéphane Payrard wanted to know if there is an easy way to alias arguments to a function.  Thus allowing a longer version for readability when calling the function and a short version inside the function.  Larry suggested C<< $s is named<subject> >>, which I like.  The thread then devolved into punning in French.

L<http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/b3eee67e168e307c/1e865f9b0b1b2eec?_done=%2Fgroup%2Fperl.perl6.language%3F&_doneTitle=Back+to+topics&_doneTitle=Back&&d#1e865f9b0b1b2eec> -- main thread on p6l


L<http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.compiler/browse_frm/thread/34c2d1c64556ad07/cab2f1836ad19582?_done=%2Fgroup%2Fperl.perl6.compiler%3F&_doneTitle=Back+to+topics&_doneTitle=Back&&d#cab2f1836ad19582> -- initial post on p6c



=head2 Perl 6 Compiler

=head3 Pascal -> Pcode -> Parrot -> Profit

Sven Schubert asked about the feasibility of putting Pascal on Parrot.  He noted that with the infrastructure mentioned in "Perl 6 and Parrot Essentials" the problem would not be too bad.  Apparently "Essentials" makes a few promises that we have yet to live up to.  But we are working towards it.  In the mean time, Stéphane Payrard suggested a way for him to kill to bird with one stone: Pcode.

L<http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.compiler/browse_frm/thread/31a7d76b780722ab/23815e6300154554?_done=%2Fgroup%2Fperl.perl6.compiler%3F&_doneTitle=Back+to+topics&_doneTitle=Back&&d#23815e6300154554>  -- Pcode suggestion


L<http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/5b37e4529be13da3/03efb9c0ed436c59?_done=%2Fgroup%2Fperl.perl6.internals%3F&_doneTitle=Back+to+topics&_doneTitle=Back&&d#03efb9c0ed436c59> -- initial post



=head3 Grammar improvements

Luke Blanshard submitted some rules for Perl6::Grammar.  Luke Palmer committed a slight variantion of his work, and the hacking commences...

L<http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.compiler/browse_frm/thread/af402d8eaa2595f5/709e2b99e7df1547?_done=%2Fgroup%2Fperl.perl6.compiler%3F&_doneTitle=Back+to+topics&_doneTitle=Back&&d#709e2b99e7df1547>



=head2 Parrot

=head3 pop_pad

Peter Christopher wondered why pop_pad had not been implemented last week.  This week Leo implemented it and asked for tests.

L<http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/98354eb8d0d4ad70/04dcf794b58ef4a0?_done=%2Fgroup%2Fperl.perl6.internals%3F&_doneTitle=Back+to+topics&_doneTitle=Back&&d#04dcf794b58ef4a0>



=head3 Resizable arrays

Simon Glover asked why ResizablePMCArray was so different from all of it Resizable*Array bretheren.  The answer is the Leo improved it.  This brings up an obvious task for someone looking for a reasonably friendly chunk of Parrot to work on.  Rationalizing the implementation of the various Resizable*Arrays would probably be a good task for a novice looking to dig into something.  Perhaps one who is on winter break...

L<http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/f7fa725341795347/930c3b4d1c0a5f44?_done=%2Fgroup%2Fperl.perl6.internals%3F&_doneTitle=Back+to+topics&_doneTitle=Back&&d#930c3b4d1c0a5f44>



=head3 Parrot 0.1.1 nci troubles

Ian Joyce noticed that parrot 0.1.1 was having some trouble with nci.t.  Leo admitted that this was the case, but it is fixed in CVS.

L<http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/d8dfa0fafe02dedb/8b10b2c544763410?_done=%2Fgroup%2Fperl.perl6.internals%3F&_doneTitle=Back+to+topics&_doneTitle=Back&&d#8b10b2c544763410>



=head3 test or benchmark

Nicholas Clark wondered if resizablestringarray.t was actually a benchmark, because it had a big number which was really hurting his poor machine.  Simon Glover admitted to the copy paste error.

L<http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/691a2601522351b8/e78069511d71c018?_done=%2Fgroup%2Fperl.perl6.internals%3F&_doneTitle=Back+to+topics&_doneTitle=Back&&d#e78069511d71c018>



=head3 x86 solaris 2.5.1 and 2.7

Andy Bach and Nicholas Clark worked towards getting parrot happier on the aforementioned architecture.  This thread seemed to peter out when Nicholas asked "how do we run a callback unconditionally after gccversion is known, independent of its value?".

L<http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/9500522899e1947b/d074ce8ab3a62a63?_done=%2Fgroup%2Fperl.perl6.internals%3F&_doneTitle=Back+to+topics&_doneTitle=Back&&d#d074ce8ab3a62a63>



=head3 VTABLE_call_method

Leo and Sam had a disagreement about whether a call_method vtable would make sense.  I think that we are waiting for higher intervention...

L<http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/8aae892b30afa338/aa30e97030cae110?_done=%2Fgroup%2Fperl.perl6.internals%3F&_doneTitle=Back+to+topics&_doneTitle=Back&&d#aa30e97030cae110>



=head3 updated perlhist.txt

Will Coleda applied Bernhard's patch updating perlhist.txt and streams.t.

L<http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/22bfbb14721de0ae/5c5636ab4ee74101?_done=%2Fgroup%2Fperl.perl6.internals%3F&_doneTitle=Back+to+topics&_doneTitle=Back&&d#5c5636ab4ee74101>



=head3 Warnock Warnocked

Will Coleda applied the long Warnocked update to Warnock's contact information with only a trace of irony.

L<http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/0034a7409597efbd/26896bd124b55178?_done=%2Fgroup%2Fperl.perl6.internals%3F&_doneTitle=Back+to+topics&_doneTitle=Back&&d#26896bd124b55178>




=head3 gcov of perlarray.pmc reaches 100%

Simon Glover got perlarray.pmc to have full test coverage.  Nifty.  Some brave soul (possibly fitting an earlier description) should try this with the Fixed*Arrays...

L<http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/cfeeb0ef3dde12e2/cdae29a89b1d92fd?_done=%2Fgroup%2Fperl.perl6.internals%3F&_doneTitle=Back+to+topics&_doneTitle=Back&&d#cdae29a89b1d92fd>



=head3 Parrot under Solaris 9

Nicholas Clark, Andy Doughery, and Christian Aperghis-Tramoni all tried to convince Parrot to work on Solaris.  They are brave souls.

L<http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/29ef269bdd16cb75/4f694b44349d51af?_done=%2Fgroup%2Fperl.perl6.internals%3F&_doneTitle=Back+to+topics&_doneTitle=Back&&d#4f694b44349d51af>



=head3 parrot-config updates

Peter Christopher asked questions about the parrot-config.imc.  He also provided an initial solution.

L<http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/55ea99da3b3804d6/0fca617bc5a38f44?_done=%2Fgroup%2Fperl.perl6.internals%3F&_doneTitle=Back+to+topics&_doneTitle=Back&&d#0fca617bc5a38f44>  -- questions


L<http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/6fc67af19e318b3a/1230d9bda8fb8e02?_done=%2Fgroup%2Fperl.perl6.internals%3F&_doneTitle=Back+to+topics&_doneTitle=Back&&d#1230d9bda8fb8e02>  -- solutions



=head3 Key Question

Simon Glover noticed some bad behavior with respect to Key PMCs.    Leo and Sam both admitted that it was bad and that some work needed to be done.

L<http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/c52d8b7fb46e4ebc/e3751681e70f1c9c?_done=%2Fgroup%2Fperl.perl6.internals%3F&_doneTitle=Back+to+topics&_doneTitle=Back&&d#e3751681e70f1c9c>



=head3 Parrot PDL

Bernhard Schmalhofer posted a pointer to PDL.  Luke Palmer pondered Piddles as Parrot PMCs.  Craig DeForest proposed a path passing through PDL's PP and pausing at Parrot.  (Parenthetically,  perhaps the preponderance of Ps in Perl, Parrot, and Python should push me to alliterate with another available letter.)

L<http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/46014b8262325b39/ac1d0b1889657d86?_done=%2Fgroup%2Fperl.perl6.internals%3F&_doneTitle=Back+to+topics&_doneTitle=Back&&d#ac1d0b1889657d86>



=head3 Parrot Syntax Engine

Henrik Gulbrandsen introduced the powerful Parrot Syntax Engine.  Leo asked a few questions to which Henrik provided answers.  All in all, it looks really cool and makes me a little jealous that I did not develop the Tomita algorithm first.

L<http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/6c638108bf813c3f/54b769e955cedae1?_done=%2Fgroup%2Fperl.perl6.internals%3F&_doneTitle=Back+to+topics&_doneTitle=Back&&d#54b769e955cedae1>



=head3 s/libnci.so/libnci_test.so/g

Bernhard Schmalhofer moved libnci.so to libnci_test.so, as it really is for testing.  Leo applied it.

L<http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/6c5ada8ac62b3599/98645416ee9d7b0a?_done=%2Fgroup%2Fperl.perl6.internals%3F&_doneTitle=Back+to+topics&_doneTitle=Back&&d#98645416ee9d7b0a>



=head3 segfaulting readline

Matt Diephouse managed to segfault Parrot using readline.  Leo fixed it.  Matt pointed out a new bug that it introduced.

L<http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/0697a38c020c9142/8793d3ef6ed74697?_done=%2Fgroup%2Fperl.perl6.internals%3F&_doneTitle=Back+to+topics&_doneTitle=Back&&d#8793d3ef6ed74697>




=head3 substrings of invalid ranges

Matt Diephouse noticed that taking a substring of an invalid range had odd results.  Simor Glover provided a bunch of tests for it.  Leo applied the patch, but mentioned that these corner cases needed to be hammered out authoritatively.

L<http://groups-beta.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/ce98e6dd1754a27c/4d536284ff2a9043?_done=%2Fgroup%2Fperl.perl6.internals%3F&_doneTitle=Back+to+topics&_doneTitle=Back&&d#4d536284ff2a9043>



=head2 The usual footer

If you find these summaries useful or enjoyable, please consider
contributing to the Perl Foundation to help support the development of
Perl. You might also like to send feedback to ubermatt@gmail.com

L<http://donate.perl-foundation.org/> -- The Perl Foundation
L<http://dev.perl.org/perl6/> -- Perl 6 Development site
L<http://planet.parrotcode.org/> -- Parrot Blog aggregator



