=head1 The Perl 6 Summary for the week ending 2005-04-26

It's my turn again. What fun.

"What," I hear you all ask, "has been going on in the crazy mixed up world of
Perl 6 design and development"? Read this summary and, beginning with
perl6-compiler, I shall tell you.

=head1 This week in perl6-compiler

=head2 Refactoring Test.pm

Stevan Little had an idea while he was refactoring Test.pm. He wondered whether
to get rid of the various C<todo_*> functions in favour of just using a
F<t/force_todo> file. Which led him to wonder about doing away with
F<t/force_todo> in favour of a C<force_todo()> function. He asked for opinions
before he started making the change (which isn't exactly a refactoring). 

General opinion seemed favourable, though I confess I am perturbed by the
proposed release trick of proclaiming all failures, whether expected or not, to
be TODOs. The current system generates an explicit list of tests that are
failing on 'core' systems. The proposed solution would seem to make all
failures equal, so even unexpected 'platform' failures wouldn't be caught. 

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=ffec23e5c25f0424eb0e39e9005d8169@iinteractive.com>

=head2 Weird thing with say ++$

What do you know, C<say $i++, ++$i> behaves weirdly.

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20050421083227.27464.qmail@lists.develooper.com>

=head2 Pugs 6.2.1 released

Autrijus announced the availability of Pugs 6.2.1 which comes complete with
much shininess. 

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20050423225546.GA26560@aut.dyndns.org>

=head1 This week in perl6-language

=head2 Parrot Common Lisp

Cory Spencer's port of Common Lisp to Parrot was much admired (it's got some
way to go before it's I<really> Common Lisp, but it's a cracking start). Uwe
Volker suggested porting emacs to it and was promptly accused of being Erik
Naggum by Lars Balker Rasmussen. 

Cory acquired (or is acquiring) a committer bit.

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=Pine.LNX.4.62.0504141459030.32167@okcomputer.antiflux.org>

=head2 State of the Tcl

Will Coleda gave the list a heads up on the state of ParTCL, the Parrot TCL
port. It's still failing some tests, apparently because of GC issues. 

A few days later, these problems went away (we're not quite sure how though).

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=4265DCD4.5060708@coleda.com>

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=426D8EFD.1020201@coleda.com>

=head2 C<alarm()> and C<later()>

Leo stated that Parrot provides subsecond timer resolution as well as alarm
callbacks and multiple timers. Hurrah!

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=200504200620.j3K6K4T02837@thu8.leo.home>

=head2 RFC C<assign Px, Py>

Leo posted a discussion of the semantics of C<assign> and C<set>, with a
proposed change to PIR syntax. Warnock applies.

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=4268AD4F.2030708@toetsch.at>

=head2 RFC unary operations

In another RFC, Leo discussed changes to Parrot's unary operators and proposed
other changes. 

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=42691D77.6060808@toetsch.at>

=head2 One more MMD -- assignment

Dan noted that he was writing a great deal of code in his C<set_pmc> vtable
methods that looked very MMD-like. He suggested that adding assignment to the
list of MMD functions might be a good idea. Leo pointed him at his assignment
RFC. 

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=a06210215be8ed35f7f36@[172.24.18.155]>

=head2 Fun with C<morph()>

Nicholas Clark wondered about the responsibilities of the C<morph> method with
respect to handling C<PMC_struct_val>. In the subsequent discussion it became
apparent that C<morph> can get complicated. Bob Rogers supplied a bunch of
extra complications and wondered about the feasibility of making Parrot
morph-free. Leo agreed that it seemed feasible and is probably a good idea.
Another subthread made my head hurt -- I can understand this stuff much better
when I'm sat 'round a table with people and we're kept supplied with drinks,
notepaper and, in Leo's case, industrial quantities of
tobacco. (Ah... YAPC::Paris!) 

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20050423220805.GQ57402@plum.flirble.org>

=head2 Building an incomplete code generator into Parrot

rocko@adampreble.com (that's the only name I have) has started work on
implementing a JIT backend for the AMD64 processor. He asked a few questions
and Leo provided answers.

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20050424011934.ey5ch49tavo08k0o@www.adampreble.com>

=head2 Calling Convention Abstraction

This thread continues to rumble on. Leo said that what he wants is for
the HLL folks to create a workable scheme for abstract and extendable calling
conventions that could express all the various HLL specific semantics of
function calling, pointing out that, unless we have this we can forget
interoperability (or at least, easy interop).

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=426B5794.9010101@toetsch.at>

=head2 Alpha development Box

Bob Rogers 'has' an Alpha development box that can be used for open source
projects. He wondered if the Parrot project could make use of it, and if so
what was the best way of doing this. Some discussion occurred on the list, but
I assume (hope) more happened offline.

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=17004.19419.780341.502435@rgrjr.dyndns.org>

=head1 Meanwhile, in perl6-language

=head2 Calling junctions of closures

Brad Bowman wondered about calling junctions of closures. He guessed that the
rule is "call 'em all and return a similarly structured junction." but wasn't
sure. Thomas Sandlaß wasn't so sure. 

My head hurts.

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=1113985623.1088.170.camel@oxum>

=head2 C<< { => } >> autocomposition

Autrijus asked about the following fragment:

    %ret = map { $_ => uc $_ }, split '', $text;

which gives Pugs a massive headache.

>From the ensuing discussion, it appears to cause Larry and Autrijus headaches
too. Also, it turns out that Larry's Perl 5 to Perl 5 translator has both
madprops and madskills. Hurrah! Darren Duncan suggested that 

    %ret = map:{ $_ => uc $_ }, split '', $text;

should serve to say that the block is to be treated as a block rather than a
hash constructor. He thought that that came from one of the synopses, but
couldn't remember which.

I wonder if 

    %ret = map -> {$_ => uc $_}, split '', $text; 

wouldn't do the job. (Or did the syntax change on me when I wasn't looking?)

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20050420143834.GA15699@aut.dyndns.org>

=head2 Embedding languages in Perl 6

BÁRTHÁZI András had some questions about introducing different parsing rules in
the middle of a Perl 6 program. Larry's answer was, essentially "All's fair if
you predeclare", but with an interesting idea about using C<`> as a way of
introducing a 'self-terminating construct', so one could do:

   use XML;

   $a = `<elems><elem>Content #1</elem><elem>Content #2</elem></elems>;

or 

   use SQL;

   $a = `select * from table`;

Various possibilities were discussed, but nothing got set in stone.

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=42667083.8060706@barthazi.hu>

=head2 Closure/block/sub multiplier

Matt Creenan wondered about doing C<@names = &get_next(...) XX 5;> (which,
obviously, would call C<&get_next> five times and shove the results into
C<@names>). Juerd pointed out some subtleties to do with functions that return
closures. Later in the thread he decided that he controlled both the horizontal
and the vertical, with particular reference to redefining true, false and
undef. 

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=op.spjiubnq8hsiyb@codeslut>

=head2 C<alarm()> and C<later()>

Remember the discussion of C<alarm> and C<later> in perl6-internals? It moved
over to perl6-language. Larry agreed that Perl 6's time interfaces would
favour floating point time values, but he wasn't quite sure if any of them
would be called C<alarm>. Discussion ensued, both on the topic and matters of
naming style.

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20050420171135.GD29671@wall.org>

=head2 $?OS globals, etc

Scott McWhirter proposed making the various $?OS etc variables into attributes
of some GLOBAL class. Larry thought it was a good idea, but wasn't sure it was
entirely right as proposed; this area is still being designed.

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=4266B13E.7030106@kungfuftr.com>

=head2 Parens vs. subroutine parameter

Autrijus had a question about how function signatures and various forms of
paren magic interacted. He, Juerd and Larry thrashed things out.

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20050420201951.GA22262@aut.dyndns.org>

=head2 C<-X>s auto-(un)quoting

Michele Dondi had some questions/suggestions about the various file test
operators. Larry answered and the thread spun off into a discussion of all
sorts of aspects of these handy operators. Well, that was before it turned into
a discussion of the semantic of <.foo>, or was that C<^foo>, or maybe C<_foo>,
or possibly C<....foo>. At this point, things got a little heated. There's no
decision as yet (personally I'm a fan of the scheme as originally proposed;
C<.foo> calls the method foo on the current topic, whatever that may be. If you
need to hang onto old topics, give them a name. I appear to be in something of
a minority).

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=Pine.LNX.4.61.0504210953250.4902@rhum.pcteor1.mi.infn.it>

=head2 Unify cwd

It turns out that the 'current working directory' isn't as obvious as it
sounds. It also turns out that Larry would like to be able to pretend that it
is until it turns out not to be.

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=m27jiw4pju.fsf@phoenix.squirrel.nl>

=head2 Blocks, continuations and C<eval>

When last we saw this thread, Larry had said that continuations would be
available in Perl for people who ask specially, but wouldn't be left lying
around in the open where 'some poor benighted pilgrim might trip over them
unaware'. Wolverian asked what the interface would be. Larry thought it would
probably start C<use Continuations;>, or possibly C<use CONTINUATIONS;>.

The thread prompted Stéphane Payrard to ask about the possibility of some of
the more 'out there' functional programming tricks making it into Perl 6. Once
again, all's fair if you predeclare, but it looks like Perl 6 already has core
access to some pretty out there stuff.

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20050421133007.GA13496@sci.fi>

=head2 Accepted abbreviations

Juerd wondered if we could compile a list of standard abbreviations for various
terms so that they can be consistently applied. He kicked off with a list of
his own. There was some discussion but I somehow doubt his list will be used
rigorously. 

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20050422114626.GT19716@c4.convolution.nl>

=head2 Thunking semantics of C<:=> 

Once someone starts to implement a language, you get a wonderful driver for
design decisions that need to be made and ambiguities to be ironed out. On this
occasion, Autrijus needed some clarification of the semantics of the binding
operator, C<:=>. Ambiguities were ironed, and implementations were written (and
yes, I I<do> mean implementations).

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20050423105104.GA18812@aut.dyndns.org>

=head2 C<for all(@foo) {...}>

Brad Bowman had questions about the workings of C<for all(@foo) {...}> based on
S03. It turns out that the synopsis is wrong. Larry explained how it's supposed
to work (which is how it already works in Pugs). 

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=1114318936.4176.21.camel@oxum>

=head2 Lazy Lists + Mutable Arrays + Garbage Collection

Brad also had questions about the workings of lazy lists. In particular, he
wondered about treating streams as mutable arrays. Warnock applies.

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=1114330227.4176.83.camel@oxum>

=head2 C<< map { $_ => uc $_ }, @foo  >> again

Autrijus proposed a cunning plan to deal with the ambiguities inherent in:

    map { $_ => uc $_ }, @foo;

by suggesting that using a block without the comma should force said block to
be interpreted as a block rather than a hash constructor. Larry wasn't sure,
arguing that it were best to disambiguate with something just before, or just
inside the block (in the same way that pattern modifiers now go before the
pattern).

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20050424181326.GA41163@aut.dyndns.org>

=head2 Passing hash to a sub expecting named params

Carl Franks wondered if he could pass a splatted hash (C<*%hash>) to a function
that expects named arguments. Answer, yep.

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=4f352aae05042501144507f8ec@mail.gmail.com>

=head2 Turning off warnings for a function's params?

David Storrs wanted to be able to turn off selectively turn off some warnings
when he's testing. He asked how to go about doing it. Luke and Juerd provided
some answers.

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20050425025001.GA48670@megazone.bigpanda.com>

=head2 How do I... tie hashes/arrays

Discussion of how to tie hashes and arrays continued. 

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=426D1CF1.7070902@orthogon.com>

=head2 Surprising consequences

Juerd worried that code like C<if($foo) { say 'foo'}> would throw syntax
errors. It turns out that one of his givens wasn't quite as given as he
though. So it's not a syntax error.

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20050425190549.GO26732@c4.convolution.nl>

=head2 Calls and parens

Juerd posted a set of examples of the new rules for parsing parentheses in
function calls and asked which of his assumptions were wrong. Luke Palmer
reassured him.

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20050425193338.GQ26732@c4.convolution.nl>

=head2 Context and index expressions

Autrijus posted a set of examples of array indexes and asked if he'd got all
the contexts right. There was no answer at the time of writing.

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20050425193344.GA62148@aut.dyndns.org>

=head1 Hmm... still fun. I could get used to this.

If you find these summaries useful or enjoyable, please consider
contributing to the Perl Foundation to help support the development of
Perl. 

L<http://donate.perl-foundation.org/> -- The Perl Foundation

L<http://dev.perl.org/perl6/> -- Perl 6 Development site

Or, you can check out my website. Maybe now I'm back writing stuff I'll start
updating it.

L<http://www.bofh.org.uk/>

Vaguely pretty photos by me can be found at:

L<http://www.flickr.com/photos/pdcawley>

See you all in a fortnight.

