=head1 This Week on perl5-porters (26 July / 1st August 2004)

Due to OSCON and other things, there wasn't much traffic on the
perl 5 porters mailing list, but I bet that this wasn't a non-productive
week in the Perl world.

=head2 Optree

Jim Cromie was looking at the basic OP structure, and wondered why there
are always two fields C<op_sibling> and C<op_next> that seem to have the
same purpose. He's willing to try to unify them. Dave Mitchell commented
that the operation might be quite delicate (or in other words that dragons
hide in the optree optimizer.)

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=41092249.9030903%40divsol.com

=head2 From the C lib

Slaven Rezic proposed to use strlcpy() instead of strncpy() in the perl
core, but that would need at least to add a Configure probe for it. (bug
#30838).

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=rt-3.0.11-30838-92699.13.8032172316222%40perl.org

=head2 MakeMaker and rpaths

Rafael provided a patch to remove the empty rpaths (runtime paths,
searched to find dynamic shared librairies) that might be put by MakeMaker
into the F<.so> files during the build process. Marcus Holland-Moritz came
up with a small enhancement. Michael Schwern declined to comment yet.

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=20040728105649.71714da0%40localhost

=head2 Perl6-ish BEGIN

Randal L. Schwartz proposed to enhance the syntax of BEGIN blocks so that
it can return a value (at compile-time, being constant-folded). Rafael
comments that it might not be very difficult, but that it looks like a
feature for blead rathen than for maint. Mark Mielke pointed out a
smallish backwards incompatibility with this idea.

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=863c3651ch.fsf%40blue.stonehenge.com

=head2 Mixed line endings

Richard Jelinek reported that perl can't cope with UTF-8 encoded source
files that mix different types of line endings. (Apparently there is some
evil emacs extension that routinely produces such files.)

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=20040729231153.A16115%40petamem.com

=head2 In Brief

Tels released Math::BigInt 1.71.

In the process of doing so, he wonders what is the difference between
overload::StrVal() and Scalar::Util::refaddr(). Apparently the later can
be used in place of the former. Fergal Daly and Yitzchak Scott-Thoennes
provide some historical explanations.

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=200407301527.04010%40bloodgate.com

Marcus is working towards Devel::PPPort 3.00.

David Favor reports that I<the -w operator is broken for GSA directories>
on AIX (bug #30885). Rafael has no idea what GSA directories are.

Dave Mitchell added explicative comments at the top of each core F<.c>
file. Yitzchak thought it was what the Tolkien quotes were for, actually.

Dan Jacobson thinks that if B<-i> and B<-w> used on the command-line, but
if no files are given, perl could emit a warning (bug #30858).

=head2 About this summary

This summary was written by Rafael Garcia-Suarez. Weekly summaries are
published on F<http://use.perl.org/> and posted on a mailing list, which
subscription address is F<perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org>. Comments and
corrections welcome.
