=head1 This Week on perl5-porters (12-18 January 2004)

Besides the release of a new maintenance version of perl, this week
passed and carried its usual heterogeneous load of bugs. Read below
for all the details.

=head2 5.8.3

Perl 5.8.3 was released (as expected.) The announcement and its laudatory
follow-ups can be seen at:

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=20040114192716.GA13579%40Bagpuss.unfortu.net

=head2 Formats improvements

Wolfgang Laun proposed a huge patch implementing many fixes and
improvements to formats. The details are to be found in his announcement:

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=DF27CDCBD2581D4B88431901094E4B4D02B0C4D3%40attmsx1

However one of the tests added by his patch fail on some architectures.
(bug #24927.) This is to be investigated.

=head2 In Brief

Yitzchak Scott-Thoennes asked some questions about the next development
release of Perl, to be numbered 5.9.1: what features are going to be in it?

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=20040111213417.GD2348%40efn.org

It was found that chop() and chomp() mangle UTF-8-encoded strings (bugs
#24888 and #24926). Fixes were proposed.

Abigail found out a complex regular expression that apparently corrupts
memory somehow. (bug #24898). Wolfgang Laun proposed a patch.

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=rt-3.0.8-24898-69991.2.12654944284594%40perl.org

Thomas Bayen found a very strange bug, (#24905), that was quickly fixed by
Dave Mitchell.

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=rt-3.0.8-24905-70016.12.3769365894331%40perl.org

Bug #24914 demonstrates a case of segmentation fault involving closures.
Dave Mitchell proposed a fix, but it turned out to be unperfect, causing
a regression test to hang under some conditions.

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=rt-3.0.8-24914-70050.17.1879051837409%40perl.org

Merijn Brand notices that the line

    open my $fs, $path or return;

produces a warning I<Parentheses missing around "my" list>. This warning
is actually produced by the perl parser by using some rough heuristics,
for which Sadahiro Tomoyuki proposed an improvement.

Steve Grazzini reports that

    sub f : unique {}

is a quick and efficient way to make perl segfault. (bug #24940.)

=head2 About this summary

This summary was written by Rafael Garcia-Suarez.  Weekly summaries are
published on F<http://use.perl.org/> and posted on a mailing list, which
subscription address is F<perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org>.  Corrections
and comments are welcome.
