=head1 These Weeks on perl5-porters (9-29 August 2004)

This is an olympic summary: it jumps over three full weeks!

=head2 Tainting PATH on Windows

Discussing about a new test failing in the smoke tests for Windows, Steve
Hay found that the following one-liner:

    perl -T -e "qx(unqualified)"

doesn't produce the familiar error I<Insecure $ENV{PATH} while running
with -T switch>; and all perls since 5.6.0 behave similarly on Windows.
This is probably a bug, although an old one (and the failing test was
marked TODO).

=head2 Delenda est the module list

What should be done with the CPAN module list? This discussion is perhaps
a bit off-topic for p5p, but anyway; Andy Lester began to suggest that the
document known as the Long Module List
(F<http://www.cpan.org/modules/00modlist.long.html>) is obsolescent and
should be suppressed, and explained why. Various opinions where then
expressed, more or less vocally. Graham Barr (who wrote and runs
F<http://search.cpan.org/>), at least, has no objection.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2004-08/msg00434.html

=head2 Optrees

James Mastros plays with the idea of optimising accesses to the @_ array,
maybe by introducing a new opcode for it. Commenters make good points and
raise difficulties.

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=20040809110050.29817.qmail%40onion.perl.org

Meanwhile, Jim Cromie is digging optrees. For example, he suggested to
remove some of the null ops that serve no purpose in optimized optrees;
but this doesn't raise performance significatively.

=head2 The speed of BigInt

Tels, who maintains Math::BigInt, says that it's too slow, because it's
implemented in pure perl. He proposes several solutions: either add a
replacement library to the core, or add an optional XS part to
Math::BigInt. Of course, benchmarks are needed.

=head2 perlbug

It was proposed to make C<perlbug> capable of sending mail directly
(mostly for Windows users), maybe by opening a direct connection to some
known SMTP server, of by using LWP to post something on perl's bug
tracking system F<http://rt.perl.org/>. Robert Spier, grand sysadmin,
disliked both ideas, so they're not going to be implemented. As he says,
sending the perlbug-generated report by email directly to the perlbug
adress at perl dot org works very well.

=head2 Ternary conditional and tainting

Andy Lester added various regression tests to the core test suite for
features that were neither documented nor tested. Notably, he remarked
that the expression

    $x = $tainted_data ? "Foo" : "Bar";

never results in C<$x> being tainted. The general opinion being that this
is the right behaviour, Andy wrote a test and doc patch for it.

=head2 fields

Yuval Kogman noted that the C<fields> and C<base> pragma don't allow
multiple inheritence of fields. Discussion follows; Yuval sent a patch to
fix this situation (against the CPAN version of C<base>). Nicholas Clark
pointed out that the divergence of the core and CPAN versions of C<base>
really ought to be fixed some day.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2004-08/msg00462.html

Meanwhile, Rick Delaney sent a patch to optimize the C<fields> pragma in
bleadperl (the no-pseudo-hash implementation of it.)

=head2 exec and die warnings

Stas Bekman notes that:

    exec "echo OK"; die "shouldn't be reached";

doesn't produce a warning I<Statement unlikely to be reached>, since die()
is allowed in this position. However, if die() is overriden, the warning
is still produced. This effect is a bit annoying.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2004-08/msg00629.html

=head2 In Brief

Alan Burlison discovered a small scoping issue with C<my> used in a
C<while> condition, where the C<while> loop has a C<redo>. Dave Mitchell
says it's a known issue, and that it's on his long to-do list.

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=4117A6A1.3060106%40sun.com

Dave Mitchell seems to have understood, for a limited period of time,
perl's internal exception handling mechanism (and used this knowledge to
produce a patch.) See for yourself:

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=20040809202354.GD1955%40iabyn.com

Dave also fixed a case of segmentation fault with UNIVERSAL::AUTOLOAD()
(yes, it's evil), regular expressions and threads.

Hugo found a case of deep recursion involving the C<goto &function>
construct. This was fixed by Dave (again).

Yitzchak Scott-Thoennes wants a method to tell whether fork() is supported
(by the system or via perl's emulation).

Todd C. Miller says that perl should be built on OpenBSD for the ppc and
arm architectures with the gcc flag -fno-delete-null-pointer-checks, when
using gcc 3. If not, perl segfaults randomly (and for a reason that hasn't
been tracked down).

Dan Jacobson complains that perl has no no-op. It turns out that it does:
C<0> and C<1>, used in void contect, don't generate warnings as other
numerical constants do. Long thread ensues.

Eventually this long thread leads to other subjects: should the C<..> and
C<...> be overloadable, and how to achieve this?

Pavel Fedin is porting perl 5.6.1 to MorphOS.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2004-08/msg00506.html

=head2 Selected doc patches

Kirrily "Skud" Robert sent a patch to update the F<perlnewmod> manpage to
the current CPAN module authoring best practices.

Jos Boumans proposed a patch to document some of the global configuration
variables of C<Carp>.

Steve Hay updated the F<README.win32> document with information about
building perl with the MS VC++ Toolkit 2003.

=head2 Patches that are in the queue

Welcome to the new section of the P5P summary, where the summarizer tells
everything about the patches he lets shamefully sleep in his mailbox
because he says he's running out of tuits.

Jarkko Hietaniemi sent a patch that I<fixes two problems in the encoding
pragma and the open pragma>, notably with the C<open ':locale'> subpragma.

=head2 Releases

Tels pre-released Math::BigInt 1.72.

Marcus Holland-Moritz released new alphas of Devel::PPPort, culminating in
version 3.00, with I<90 new API functions and macros supported>.

=head2 About this summary

This summary was written by Rafael Garcia-Suarez. Summaries are published
at irregular intervals on F<http://use.perl.org/> and posted on a mailing
list, which subscription address is F<perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org>.
Comments and corrections welcome. Oh, and google groups are breaking,
apparently.
