=head1 These Weeks on perl5-porters (12-25 July 2004)

This week's summary actually covers two weeks. Anyway, with OSCON,
vacations and all that stuff, those are quiet weeks. Read on.

=head2 5.8.5 is out

Perl 5.8.5 was released. The P5P announcement can be found at:

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=20040719222147.GG784%40plum.flirble.org

=head2 Readonlyness

The thread that spawned from the RC2 release candidate and the problems
solved by it then discussed the problem of the meaning of readonlyness of
SVs. Does it mean that the internal representation of the SV (notably
regarding UTF-8) should be read-only too? No precise consensus was
reached, although Hugo suggested that a readonly PV can be upgraded to
UTF-8, but not downgraded.

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=20040720102342.GL784%40plum.flirble.org

=head2 Flexible exceptions

Nicholas Clark wonders what represents the C compilation symbol
C<PERL_FLEXIBLE_EXCEPTIONS>. Nick Ing-Simmons says that it's an old,
unmaintained branch of the code, no longer used. H. Merijn Brand speaks
about chainsaws.

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=20040713143217.GB1424%40plum.flirble.org

=head2 Snatching SVs

Stas Bekman asks a question: how (from XS code) can he store an SV away
and reuse it later, making sure that perl won't touch it and try to reuse
it again. Dave Mitchell explains the difference between mortals and
PADTMPs, and how Stas can achieve his goal.

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=41016DE5.40206%40stason.org

=head2 Thread bugs

Nigel Sandever remarks that sharing an array or a hash (in the ithread
sense of the word) empties it. Elizabeth Mattijsen explains that it's a
side-effect of using ties to share things, and Nick Ing-Simmons adds that
it's expected behaviour (by design.) (bug #30702.)

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=rt-3.0.11-30702-92297.10.3407352468845%40perl.org

Nigel also reported (bug #30674) that perl segfaults when lots of threads
are created. This is due to the lack of check for the return value of the
internal CreateThread() function. He suggests that perl should die or panic
in this case. Discussion goes on on memory allocators. Meanwhile, Nicholas
patches.

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=rt-3.0.11-30674-92219.13.8761503317861%40perl.org

=head2 Other bugs

Nicholas found that for 64 bit builds, there is a problem with overloading
C<0+>. He then patched the bug out.

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=20040714125211.GO784%40plum.flirble.org

Mike Rosulek found that I<passing C<@array[()]> as the second arg to a
($;$) prototyped sub actually passes the first arg twice> (bug #30688).
This was fixed by Rick Delaney.

File::Find is known to be memory intensive when traversing deep directory
trees (bug #30718). Jim Cromie's advice is to use File::Find::Rule
instead.

Ton Hospel reported that deleting a non-existent element of an array leaks
memory. This was fixed by Dave Mitchell, who remarked that this bug
doesn't affect hashes. (Bug #30733.)

James Mastros makes perl dump core by localising C<$foo> and then assigning
to C<*foo> (bug #30778).

Autrijus Tang found (and patched) a bug in Test::Builder (bug #30783). It
comes from the fact that it's not allowed to store an unshared reference
in a shared structure. Thus, overloaded unshared refs are not allowed as
test names.

DH finds that C<blib> uses Cwd and File::Spec, and consequently doesn't
work to test Cwd and File::Spec. He proposes a patch, but Rafael has some
concerns with it.

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=20040722043138.40380.qmail%40web60801.mail.yahoo.com

=head2 To-do

More to-do items were discussed and added to the perltodo list:

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=20040711194958.GI784%40plum.flirble.org

Among wanted items: a reentrant regexp engine, autoloaded inlineable
constants, better patchlevel information in the B<-v> output, and more
human beings to implement all that stuff.

=head2 Other news

Casey West announced the resurrection of the grand Perl Power Tools
project (and its associated mailing list).

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2004-07/msg00715.html

Tels is in the process of releasing Math::BigInt v1.71, which addresses
bug #30609 (reported last week.)

Michael Schwern released Test::Simple 0.48_02 (alpha version), and
announced that his aegis repository for Test::More is publicly accessible.

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=20040719062510.GA19661%40windhund.schwern.org
    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=20040719165659.GA23035%40windhund.schwern.org

Brad Elkins send some compilation fixes for AIX 5.1, to have PAR working
correctly on it.

=head2 NetWare port

P Aravinda sent a big patch to make perl compile on NetWare (or, more
precisely, to cross-compile a perl for NetWare from Linux). Nicholas Clark
raised some concerns concerning his patch, both on technical and on
licensing points.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2004-07/msg00570.html

=head2 About this summary

This summary was written by Rafael Garcia-Suarez. Weekly (or, sometimes,
fortnightly) summaries are published on F<http://use.perl.org/> and posted
on a mailing list, which subscription address is
F<perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org>. Comments and corrections welcome.
