=head1 This Week on perl5-porters (23-29 February 2004)

This week's summary, a bit late, will tell about the approaching
development release, the new bugs discovered and fixed, and the
side-effects of the new warnings.

=head2 CPAN modules and bleadperl

Hoping to release perl 5.9.1 soon, Rafael asked to test CPAN modules
against it. Bugs were found (and fixed) in PAR and in XML::Twig; he
detected as well some problems with XML::Parser::PerlSAX, a module which
apparently is no longer actively maintained, but which is still widely
used.

Rafael noted also that the regression tests produce lots of warnings
I<Deprecated use of my() in conditional>, referring to the dubious and
now deprecated construct

    my $foo = $bar if $quux;

So the warning is maybe too noisy (although it indicates a bug waiting to
happen.) Rafael and Dave Mitchell proposed some alternatives, but the
current form of the warning is likely to go into 5.9.1, even if it's made
lighter afterwards.

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=20040226004123.245a15ad.rgarciasuarez%40free.fr

Marcus Holland-Moritz also found that Convert::Binary::C was producing a
most strange error with bleadperl, which was tracked down and fixed by
Dave Mitchell, the cause being rooted in the internals of the new bison
parser for perl.

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=20040227201207.7584bf56.mhx-perl%40gmx.net

=head2 C<Storable> and ithreads

Beau E. Cox is courageously trying to get C<Storable> work thread-safely,
including under older perls. The further discussion is about ways of using
the C<PERL_NO_GET_CONTEXT> is XS code, and ways of advertising it in the
F<perlxstut> manpage.

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=200402232243.29069.beau%40beaucox.com

=head2 Another proof that C<$[> is evil

Ton Hospel reported that the one-liner

    $[ = 1 while $x;

makes perl segfault. (bug #27024). This is due to the pragmatic
(compile-time) nature of assignments to C<$[>, and was fixed by Rafael.

=head2 Bugs in multiline regexps

Zefram reported that, I<contrary to the documentation, C</^/m> does not
match after a newline that is at the end of the string> (bug #27053), but
it's not clear which one, of the documentation or the code, should be
modified.

He also reported that C<qr/$/> misbehaves in C</.../m> regexps; Hugo van
der Sanden explained that this was due to the global variable C<$*>
interfering with the C</m> flag. C<$*> (which was deprecated) has been
removed from bleadperl, but its internal counterpart should be suppressed
as well. (Bug #27028.)

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=rt-3.0.8-27028-79227.10.9485947752979%40perl.org

=head2 Other Bugs

John M. Dlugosz produces the error I<Attempt to free unreferenced scalar>
with the C<charnames> module; Dave reduced it to a few lines in two files
(bug #27040).

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=rt-3.0.8-27040-79720.3.9168168233855%40perl.org

Ton Hospel finds a new way to leak memory, combining C<redo> and
C<continue> (bug #27206).

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=rt-3.0.8-27206-80174.5.18731750813757%40perl.org

Ton also found a bug regarding the interpolation of array subscripts
involving C<$&> in the right-hand side of substitutions. Tricky. (bug
#26986).

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=rt-3.0.8-26986-79096.12.4352684111778%40perl.org

=head2 In Brief

Tassilo von Parseval provided a patch to optimise map() used in scalar
context. (It was already optimised in void context.)

Chia-liang Kao provided a patch to C<Benchmark> to make cmpthese() and
timestr() use time statistics for children instead of parent when the
selected benchmark style is 'nop'.

Dave Mitchell fixed the recursive C<goto &f> leak noticed last week.

Nicholas Clark released a snapshot of maintperl. He plans a code freeze
for 5.8.4 at the end of March.

=head2 And now for a bit of advertisement

David Wheeler forwarded a message from the PostgreSQL community, saying that
I<there's a fair bit of interest there in improving pl/Perl -- that is,
the ability to write native database functions in Perl>. Help welcomed.

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=757FBF18-6AF0-11D8-A088-000A95972D84%40wheeler.net

=head2 About this summary

This summary was written by Rafael Garcia-Suarez.  Weekly summaries are
published on F<http://use.perl.org/> and posted on a mailing list, which
subscription address is F<perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org>.  Corrections
and comments are welcome.
