=head1 This Week on perl5-porters (5-11 April 2004)

Spring is here, at least in the northern hemisphere, and perl 5.8.4 is
approaching. This doesn't stop the Perl 5 porters from pursuing their
usual job: proposing exciting new ideas, and fixing bugs. Read on for the
details.

=head2 Towards 5.8.4

Nicholas Clark posted a draft of the perldelta for perl 5.8.4, and then
released a first release candidate, which triggered some last-minute
adjustments. Randal L. Schwartz also commented on the modules that were
still newer on CPAN than in the RC1 tarball; which is not to be considered
absolutely evil, as Nicholas explained, given that the primary goal of a
maintenance release is stability.

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=20040404224109.GJ701%40plum.flirble.org
    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=20040405215642.GG676%40plum.flirble.org

=head2 More pack templates

Marcus Holland-Moritz proposed an extension to the pack() template syntax,
to handle signed integers in big- and in little-endian order. H. Merijn
Brand suggested that, instead of using new letters, one could use a C<!>
suffix to denote signedness, proposition which was unanimously approved.

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=20040405182634.7dc02687%40r2d2

But then, Marcus took his initial idea further, and proposed a more
general extension. This second one, among other things, uses the C<< < >>
and C<< > >> suffixes to denote respectively little- and big-endianness.
Patches are to be expected.

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=20040408180559.470c4a47%40r2d2

=head2 Unicode exercise

Jarkko Hietaniemi proposed a small Unicode task for the interested:
automate the generation of Unicode properties in perl's Unicode character
tables (the files in F<lib/unicore>); they are currently hardcoded.
The details can be found at:

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=40750F8A.7020006%40iki.fi

=head2 Optree black magic

Jim Cromie, who recently worked on the C<B::Concise> (a core module to
dump optrees), got an idea: using a C<B::Concise> style to generate code
to be executed by C<B::Generate> to generate an optree equivalent to the
one which was dumped.

Scott Walters commented that he is, on his own, working on a Perl 6 to
Perl 5 bytecode compiler, in sight of using B::Generate to have executable
code; and some of the efforts converge here. Something interesting might
be produced by this (maybe I<psooie> --	I<Perl Six On Old Internals
Engine>.)

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=40745889.6090208%40divsol.com

=head2 An improved warning

Dave Mitchell proposed a patch to improve the famous warning I<Use of
uninitialized value...> by adding the name of the undefined variable or
array/hash subscript that triggered the warning in the potentially faulty
expression. I'm sure this additional verbosity will make lots of coders
happy.

=head2 Caching tied hash elements

Jamie Lokier submitted an extensive bug report (bug #28233) concerning the
aggressive caching of references to elements of tied hashes. Those
references are magical, since reading from them calls FETCH() and writing
to them calls STORE(), but the read or written value is cached by perl,
and sometimes this cache isn't invalidated whereas it should be. Jamie
proposed a solution but nobody commented yet.

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=rt-3.0.8-28233-83777.13.7804390706522%40perl.org

=head2 Some other bugs

Rafael fixed a compiler bug, which was indefinitively looping when
parsing (not executing) the following construct:

    map { while (1) {} } ()

David Dyck noticed a glitch in F<find2perl>, now that it defaults to
C<-print> if no other action is specified: it shouldn't default to
C<-print>, however, when one of the actions is an C<-eval>. This was
fixed.

Andrew Alakozow reported (as bug #28364) that perl segfaults on Win32 when
some XS code changes values in the program's environment, and when
the destruct level is greater than 0 (for example in spawned threads, or
when the environment variable PERL_DESTRUCT_LEVEL is set at an appropriate
value).

Leah reported (bug #28294) that the module C<File::Basename> is plagued
with deficiencies. Rafael suggests either to rewrite it (eventually with a
backport to CPAN), or to deprecate it.

=head2 Upgraded modules

Dave Rolsky released Time::Local 1.08, then 1.09, which contain mostly
documentation and test fixes.

Jarkko Hietaniemi released Time::HiRes 1.57, 1.58, and 1.59. It fixes a
problem on Windows and Cygwin platforms: I<if the performance counter
drifts by more than two seconds from the system clock (due to ntp
adjustments, for example), recalibrate our internal counter>.

=head2 About this summary

This summary was written by Rafael Garcia-Suarez, from Paris, France.
Thanks to Elizabeth Mattijsen for having taken the role of interim
summarizer during two weeks. (And now for a highly personal advertisement:
I'm still looking for a flat in Paris. Offers welcome!)

Weekly summaries are published on F<http://use.perl.org/> and posted on a
mailing list, which subscription address is
F<perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org>. Comments and corrections are welcome.
