=head1 This Week on perl5-porters (19-25 January 2004)

Another summary this week, not really different from the previous ones,
as it contains the usual bug reports and other discussions. The bugs,
however, are new. Read below.

=head2 On the order of arguments to C<Exporter>

Mark-Jason Dominus reports that you can't write

    use Fcntl "O_RDONLY", ":flock";

because C<Exporter> will think that C<:flock> is the name of a symbol to
be imported, not of a group of symbols. (bug #25160.) H. Merijn Brand
committed a patch to change this.

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=rt-3.0.8-25160-71481.14.1614537314423%40perl.org

=head2 The dor patch to 5.8.3

H. Merijn Brand uploaded the defined-or patch against 5.8.3 to CPAN (which
adds to it the C<//> and C<err> operators that exist in bleadperl).
However, it contained a minor error, causing the output of C<perl -V>
not to include the proper I<Locally applied patches> section. As PAUSE
doesn't let people upload the same file twice, Merijn deleted the first
patch and uploaded a new one under the name F<dor-5.8.3a.diff>, which can
be found in his CPAN directory (HMBRAND).

=head2 In Brief

Leon Brocard released a snapshot of perl 5.005_04 :

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=20040121100937.GA8793%40kanga.astray.com

Some progress was made on the Storable module. Stas Bekman sent a patch to
make it thread-safe. Moreover, Sam Vilain fixed a case of segmentation
fault (bug #25145).

Stas wants the strategies used to handle memory allocations on Windows to
be improved, esp. where ithreads are involved. Jan Dubois is working on
it, but issues are complex.

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=400DEA8A.8020208%40stason.org

Alan Burlison points out an error in the documentation of threads
pertaining to the interaction of threading with forking. Also, he notes
that an explicit unlock() would be more flexible than the implicit
unlock-at-end-of-scope that happens currently.

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=4013DFA9.5030008%40sun.com

Steve Hay proposed a patch to add a camel icon to F<perl.exe> on Windows.

David Jantzen reports (bug #25237) that perl leaks memory when recursively
traversing circular datastructures. Dave Mitchell explains that he managed
somehow to I<create a closure which closes over itself>. So leakage is to
be expected.

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=rt-3.0.8-25237-72009.6.72018147677328%40perl.org

=head2 Bugs fixed

Gisle Aas reported that the simple statement

    print if foo

doesn't die under strictures (bug #25147). This was fixed by Dave
Mitchell.

The constructs

    sub foo : unique {}
    my $x : unique;

are now disallowed in bleadperl (until someone comes up with a
sensible signification for them.)

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=rt-3.0.8-24940-70133.7.7098418042744%40perl.org

Detached threads now work on Windows, thanks to Jan Dubois. They used to
crash on interpreter exit.

=head2 About this summary

This summary was written by Rafael Garcia-Suarez.  Weekly summaries are
published on F<http://use.perl.org/> and posted on a mailing list, which
subscription address is F<perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org>.  Corrections
and comments are welcome.
