=head1 This Week on perl5-porters (Oct 11-17 2004)

"This Week on perl5-porters" was started by Mark-Jason Dominus five
years ago on October 17, exactly five years after the release of
perl 5.000.

=head2 Debugger handles threads

Richard Foley and Yitzchak Scott-Thoennes added support for debugging
programs using C<ithreads>. This added the C<e> and C<E> commands for
displaying the current thread ID and list of thread IDs, respectively,
when -dt is specified on the command-line or C<$ENV{PERL5DB_THREADED}>
is set.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2004-10/msg00187.html

=head2 Handling failure in source code filters

Steve Hay wondered what Perl source code filters should do on failure.
Perl isn't aware that there was a failure, so it's necessary to C<croak>
from the filter. A C<Perl_filter_read> comment suggests that it should
return a negative number on failure, whereas C<S_filter_gets> just
returns null, so it's not clear which should be correct.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2004-10/msg00202.html

=head2 %INC caching failure-case problem

Nicholas Clark found a problem (#31924) in bleadperl:

  $ echo die >fail.pm
  $ ./perl -Ilib -e 'eval "use fail q{:std};"; $INC{"fail.pm"} = "fail.pm"'
  Modification of non-creatable hash value attempted, subscript "fail.pm"
    at -e line 1.

Rick Delaney said this is because of compile failures being cached wrongly,
and he submitted a patch to make C<keys %INC> only return names of files
successfully loaded. Yitzchak Scott-Thoennes objected to having hidden
entries in C<%INC>.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2004-10/msg00142.html

=head2 Exporting constants

David Radunz offered a patch to Exporter so that it would declare constants.
Michael Schwern fears that this will make Exporter much slower and that
it might not be that useful anyway because not all constants are declared
with C<constant.pm>.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2004-10/msg00064.html

=head2 Pod::Man =head1 capitalization

David Wheeler proposed having Pod::Man force uppercasing of C<=head1>
headings. Russ Allbery resisted this, because Pod::Man doesn't
necessarily only generate regular man pages, though he'd be open
to an option.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2004-10/msg00230.html

=head2 ETA for 5.8.6

Nicholas Clark mentioned that he plans to go to a four month release
schedule (previously it was three months), which means a code freeze
on Halloween for 5.8.6.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2004-10/msg00248.html

=head2 In brief

Craig Berry fixed a Devel::PPPort test on VMS.

Moshe Kaminsky fixed C<warnings::warn($obj, $msg)> where $obj has
overloaded stringification.

Tels made C<warnings.pm> not load C<Carp.pm> unnecessarily, saving a bit
of memory.

=head2 Reference

The thread for bug number $BUGNUM can be found at
http://rt.perl.org/rt3/Ticket/Display.html?id=$BUGNUM

=head2 About this summary

This summary was written by Scott Lanning. Summaries are published
weekly at http://use.perl.org/ and posted to a mailing list whose
subscription address is perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org. The archive
is at http://dev.perl.org/perl5/list-summaries/. Comments and
corrections welcome.
