=head1 This Week on perl5-porters (19-25 April 2004)

The rhythm of maintenance releases is now well established, and this week
saw the release of perl 5.8.4, as expected. Meanwhile, the usual stream
of bugs and patches continued.

=head2 5.8.4

Perl 5.8.4 was released. The new F<setuidperl> executable which was
present in RC2 was finally withdrawn; the new plan is to have F<suidperl>
installed as a hard link to F<perl>, and F<sperl5.8.4> being the actual
set-uid executable. (See the latest F<perldelta> for the details.)

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=20040422155622.GN701%40plum.flirble.org
    http://search.cpan.org/~nwclark/perl-5.8.4/pod/perl584delta.pod

=head2 New compiler to port perl on

Yves Orton tells the crowd about the newly released command-line compiler
by Microsoft, available as a free download. Follows some remarks on how
to build perl on Windows with it, and what are the odds and ends of the
differents versions of Microsoft's compilers.

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=71B318898201D311845C0008C75DAD1C0A44CD19%40defra1ex2

=head2 Duplicated code

Nicholas Clark ran a tool to find duplicated code on the perl source code;
and it seems that there's some room for refactorization. As he writes,
I<quite a bit is duplication between code in the win32, wince and netware
subdirectories.>

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=20040422162152.GO701%40plum.flirble.org

=head2 Use of uninitialized $foo in...

Dave Mitchell commited to bleadperl his patch to enhance the I<Use of
uninitialized value> warning by adding the name of the variable or
array/hash subscript, if any, which was uninitiliazed. Nicholas Clark
wonders if it's applicable to the perl 5.8.x branch, but Dave points out
that it's likely to cause spurious test failures in various CPAN modules.
Notably, he had to patch several core tests corresponding to CPAN modules
to make them cope with the new form of the warning.

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=20040423212027.GA3051%40iabyn.com

=head2 Patches

Marcus Holland-Moritz committed a patch to add the support in pack()
templates for the C<< < >> and C<< > >> modifiers which were discussed in
a previous summary. He has some questions on some oddities of the
implementation, but nobody commented. (Anybody has a Cray handy?)

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=20040423063124.3c717a6b%40r2d2

Jeff Pinyan proposed a patch to bleadperl to enhance perl's Unicode
tables, notably for a better compliance.

Stas Bekman supplied a patch to log the perl interpreter address in
internal warnings emitted by a multithreaded perl.

=head2 In brief

Jay Hannah is surprised by the fact that sort() in scalar context doesn't
return any useful value (more precisely when it's used as the last thing
in a function that gets called in scalar context). Randal Schwartz points
out that there is no such thing as a list value in scalar context, and
gives a list of builtins commonly used in a list context, and what special
value they return in a scalar context.

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=003e01c42886$6605ee90$4722000a%40omarests2

David Manura found a bug related to the pos() corresponding to a match
done on a reference to a substr() lvalue. Probably some magic that is not
cleaned as it should, according to Yitzchak Scott-Thoennes.

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=4084A038.80304%40math2.org

Mark Jason-Dominus reports that File::Find doesn't detect dangling
symlinks when the option C<follow_fast> is used (bug #28929).

=head2 About this summary

This summary was written, in the hope you enjoy it, by Rafael
Garcia-Suarez. Weekly summaries are published on F<http://use.perl.org/>
and posted on a mailing list, which subscription address is
F<perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org>. Comments and corrections welcome.
