=head1 This Week on perl5-porters (31 May / 6 June 2004)

As I've advertised the weekly P5P summaries during the French Perl
Workshop, I feel compelled to continue to write them each week... Read on
for the latest batch of commented links.

=head2 Smaller tarball

Nicholas Clark, enhancing Jeff "japhy" Pinyan's improvements to the
Unicode data tables, makes them generated at perl compile time. This way,
an unpacked clean source tree is 1.6 MB lighter.

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=20040531151254.GX1147%40plum.flirble.org

However, this produced some problems with builds on Windows using the
C<dmake> utility: the build now works, thanks to Steve Hay, but C<dmake>
tends to build things several times unnecessarily.

=head2 Data::Dumper and hooks

Gaal Yahas proposed to allow C<Data::Dumper> to call methods on objects it
dumps, if these methods exists, to produce a class-specific customized
dump. Comments were posted.

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=20040604141439.GI647%40sike.forum2.org

=head2 C<$SIG{FOO} = undef>

Dave Mitchell proposed that assigning C<undef> to a signal handler does
the same thing as assigning C<'DEFAULT'>: restore the default handler.
Nick Ing-Simmons remembers that in the past, this question was discussed:
shouldn't it set the signal handler to C<'IGNORE'> instead?

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=20040604151423.GA1896%40iabyn.com

=head2 fork() at compile-time

Robin Barker reported that on Solaris, forking in a BEGIN block seems to
repeat the remaining parts of the script twice, even though the child
process exited immediately (bug #30040). Nicholas Clark's advice is to use
POSIX::_exit() instead of perl's exit(). Ton Hospel suggests an
explanation.

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=c9sa2u$uk4$3%40post.home.lunix

=head2 Thread leaks

Two thread-related memory leaks were reported: one involving join(), by
Andrew Savige (#30063), and one involving nested arrays, by Eric Garland
(#30066).

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=rt-3.0.9-30063-89801.3.14458478683115%40perl.org
    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=rt-3.0.9-30066-89809.5.74912811298226%40perl.org

=head2 Double DESTROY

Ton Hospel produces a small code snippet where an object, stored in a
hash, is destroyed I<twice> -- that's certainly one time too many.
(Bug #30061).

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=rt-3.0.9-30061-89788.12.6990632560854%40perl.org

=head2 Memory wrapping

Calle Dybedahl finds that the new error messages emitted for large
allocations of strings are not emitted in some cases. Jarkko Hietamieni
provided patches.

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=86smdb8y27.fsf%40ulthar.bisexualmenace.org

=head2 In Brief

Ken Williams announced a new beta of Module::Build on CPAN. Testers
(and patches, but you know that) are welcome.

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=F5F32715-B452-11D8-9FAD-000A95BD9874%40mathforum.org

Sadahiro Tomoyuki fixed bug #29841 (see last week's summary), about the
C<-T> taint checks flag modifying the behaviour of perl regarding
utf8::decode(). This function, however, is considered as experimental and
better suited for internal use.

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=20040606003344.57B2.BQW10602%40nifty.com

Oddly enough, this week there were several bugs reports concerning bugs
that were already fixed, either in perl 5.8.4, in perl 5.8.5-to-be, or
bleadperl.

=head2 About this summary

This summary was written by Rafael Garcia-Suarez, from the French Perl
Workshop, a.k.a I<JournE<eacute>es Perl 2004>. Weekly summaries are
published on F<http://use.perl.org/> and posted on a mailing list, which
subscription address is F<perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org>. Comments and
corrections welcome.
