=head1 This Month on perl5-porters (1-24 September 2004)

A new summarizer.

=head2 || and && returning lvalues

Japhy wondered if || and && might be made to return lvalues,
so that you could do

  ($name && $age && $gender) = $_;

Tassilo von Parseval noted a trick with anonymous refs:

  ${\($name && $age && $gender)} = $_;

However, Yitzchak Scott-Thoennes warned that this bit of magic
shouldn't be relied on, because it only works with simple scalars
by chance.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2004-08/msg00739.html

=head2 Assignments inside lists misbehave

Emil Jerabek reported this bug (#31403):

  perl -e '@a = (1, 2, 3, 4, 5); @b = (@a, (@a = (8, 9))); print "@b\n"'
  8 9 8 9 8 8 9

Dave Mitchell said this is unfixable due to the "for efficiency,
Perl does not reference count items pushed on the stack" problem.
Yitzchak Scott-Thoennes wondered, on the other hand, if refcounting
the stack might actually increase efficiency.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2004-09/msg00020.html

=head2 += and ++ do different things under 'use integer' (bug #6021)

  use integer;
  $i = 0xffffffff; $i++;     # $i == 4294967296
  $i = 0xffffffff; $i += 1;  # $i == 0

Dave Mitchell said that pre/post ++ ops upgrade to NV, whereas +=
remains an IV. He proposed adding integer-specific ++/-- ops, which
everyone agreed wasn't appropriate for maint, with Nicolas Clark
adding that "0x7fffffff + 1 under use integer is nasal demons".

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2004-09/msg00023.html

=head2 Fields mishandling private attributes

Jean Flouret noticed (bug #31078) that C<fields> ignores private fields
that are declared after public ones. While Dave Mitchell fixed this
in 5.8.X, he found that "the 5.9.X restricted hash technique" causes
run-time errors when manipulating private fields.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2004-09/msg00071.html

=head2 Named anonymous subroutines

Ovid pointed out a trick to name anonymous subroutines:

  my $method = sub { local *__ANON__ = '__ANON__method'; ... };

There wasn't really a concensus on whether or not it should even be
documented, as it doesn't always work and likely won't exist in perl6.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2004-09/msg00154.html

=head2 Matching of backreferences to non-matched captures

Hugo highlighted the following problem (bug #3589). Whereas

  /^((.?)a\2)+$/

necessarily matches 'a' or 'XaX' (for all X matching like '.'), when
you move the '?' outside of the inner parentheses,

  /^((.)?a\2)+$/

it's not clear what \2 should match when (.)? doesn't match:

=over 4

=item empty string (as when ? is inside the parens)

=item last-captured value (as in 5.6.0)

=item nothing  (5.6.1 onward)

=back

though people seemed to lean toward the 3rd one.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2004-09/msg00263.html

=head2 In brief

Nathan Zook identified a bug (#31421) with leap years in Time::Local.
There was discussion about the _nocheck versions of C<timelocal> and
C<timegm>, their intent being to improve performance, not to make
C<Time::Local> a date math module (for which, see CPAN).

Steve Hay, Artiom, and Ken Fox negotiated to add an environment
variable, C<PERL_ALLOW_NON_IFS_LSP>, to work around a conflict between
a McAfee firewall and an LSP patch to win32 sockets.

Steve Hay was lost in a forest of #defines but managed to produce
a patch to fix chsize/ftruncate configuration on systems with no
chsize (or ftruncate), such as Cygwin.

Craig Berry added configuration support on VMS to allow C<unlink>
to delete all versions of a file.

Tels followed up with benchmarks of C<Math::BigInt> which show that
it's about two orders of magnitude slower than Perl. Still needs
to benchmark it with XS.

Yves Orton illustrated (see bug #30966) how C<File::Spec::Win32>'s
path function should handle quotes in PATH strings.

skv@protey.ru reported (bug #31521) that passing a '%.2f' format to
C<sv_vcatpvfn> gives a bogus result. Hugo (hv@crypt.org) found that the
problem occurs due to the 'special-case "%.<number>[gf]"' section in
C<sv_vcatpvfn>, and manifests itself from C code but not from Perl
code, and he recommended that the special case be removed.

Marcus Holland-Moritz analyzed C<SvOK_off>'s return value and simplified
by putting a void cast in S<SvOOK_off> rather than the 38 places where
it's called from.

Yitzchak Scott-Thoennes submitted a patch to avoid unneeded C<lstat>s
in C<glob>.

Dan Kogai noticed that multiline UTF-16 scripts are broken, prompting
Jarkko Hietaniemi to quote a story from gnat about yylex, tattoos,
lipstick, and someone named Yuri.

Dave Mitchell made an executive decision to fix sv_upgrade so that it
sets the C<AVf_REAL> flag. In this case, bug #30066, it fixed a memory
leak with nested shared data structures in threads, but not setting
the flag had also caused other problems in the past.

YAPC::EU took place in Belfast, Ireland. (Among other things, I heard
that they had an auction to decide that next year's hosts' tshirt
"color" be fishnet.)

=head2 Releases

Dan Kogai released Encode 2.02 (upgrade of big5-hkscs).

Ken Williams released Module::Build 0.25_3 beta, File::Spec 0.90,
and Cwd 2.21.

Pavel Fedin ported Perl 5.6.1 to MorphOS.

=head2 Reference

The thread for bug number $BUGNUM can be found at
http://rt.perl.org/rt3/Ticket/Display.html?id=$BUGNUM

=head2 About this summary

This summary was written by Scott Lanning as Rafael taught him
des gros mots on #perlfr. Summaries are published at irregular
intervals on http://use.perl.org/ and posted on a mailing list
whose subscription address is perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org.
Comments and corrections welcome.
