=head1 This Week on perl5-porters (21-27 June 2004)

Summer is here, and it's vacation time for the Perl 5 porters. Well,
except for the valorous maint pumpking, who just released a snapshot of
perl 5.8.5-to-be.

=head2 cat, pipe, perl

Nicholas Clark finds that doing a simple pipe :

    cat | perl

on his system produces the trange error message, I<cat: stdin: Resource
temporarily unavailable>. After some investigation he decides it's
probably a FreeBSD 5 threading bug.

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=rt-3.0.9-30443-91308.18.7666584401696%40perl.org

=head2 Regexp bug, fixed

Jeff Pinyan found and fixed a regular expression bug: character ranges are
not computed correctly with C<\p> and C<\P>.

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=Pine.LNX.4.44.0406241636340.8774-200000%40perlmonk.org

=head2 In Brief

Edward Peschko remarks that tieing a hash which is already populated with
some values erases those values. Nicholas Clark explains that tie() isn't
actually destroying the values, but merely hiding them. Once the hash
untied, the original data is still there.

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=20040625022625.GA3087%40mdssdev05

David R.Schulte experiments that sometimes, taint error messages are
emitted for a whole conditional expression, even though only a unused part
of the expression is actually tainted. (bug #30461.)

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=rt-3.0.9-30461-91366.11.3892106357267%40perl.org

Ken Williams released Cwd 2.18.

=head2 Patch of the month

Paul Fenwick proposed a patch to make sort() play nethack when it's called
in scalar context.

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=40DA505A.2050500%40perltraining.com.au
    http://www.nethack.org/

=head2 Last minute

Nicholas released a snapshot of maintperl, just before the code freeze for
perl 5.8.5. Testers most welcome.

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=20040627220127.GC39967%40plum.flirble.org

=head2 About this summary

This summary was written by Rafael Garcia-Suarez. Weekly summaries are
published on F<http://use.perl.org/> and posted on a mailing list, which
subscription address is F<perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org>. Comments and
corrections welcome.
