=head1 This Week on perl5-porters (1-7 March 2004)

This week was one of those weeks where the bug reports outnumbered the bug
fixes. Hopefully in the future the perl 5 porters will be able to keep
perl 5 on the right track, as they continue to do, week after week.

=head2 5.005_04

Leon Brocard released perl 5.005_04, the latest perl in the 5.005 series.
The official announcement is at :

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=20040301142712.GA24155%40kanga.astray.com

=head2 Setting C<$!>

Following a thread about an update to the perlxstut manpage that Marcus
Holland-Moritz is writing, there was some interesting discussion about the
proper way to set the C<$!> errno variable from user code, whether this is
a good idea, and how the PerlIO system handles it. Nick Ing-Simmons points
out that C<$!> is actually the C variable errno, and that perl stringifies
it via strerror(3) when used in string context; and thus that it shouldn't
be set to custom values and error messages.

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=40453C56.1050501%40stason.org

=head2 About the debugger

Richard Foley added a couple of commands to the perl debugger: C<save>,
to save the current history to a file, and C<i>, which prints the
inheritance tree of its argument (if C<Class::ISA> is installed.)

Chip Salzenberg finds out that the perldebugger sometimes hangs when it's
back from a pager. Richard believes it's a known bug, but Chip is using
the most recent 5.8.3 from Debian.

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=20040303213506.GO10904%40perlsupport.com

=head2 More on the famous lexical-in-conditional deprecation warning

Finally, Rafael changed his mind and preferred that

    my $x if $foo;

doesn't warn anymore, and that only

    my $x if 0;

does (clearly an abuse of the current accidental feature). The new form of
this warning, implemented by Dave Mitchell, is now I<Deprecated use of
my() in false conditional>.

=head2 Range operator edge cases

Marcus Thiesen began to notice that C<undef .. undef> produces a segfault
with perl 5.8.x. Marcus Holland-Moritz provided a patch, but later tried
some combinations with C<undef> or an empty string at one or both ends of
a C<..>, and posted his conclusions (along with other bugs found and
fixed) with some questions (what should C<undef .. undef> and other
strange combinations return?)

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=20040307211120.10e46933%40r2d2

=head2 readline() and PerlIO slurp mode

Stas Bekman remarks that, in some cases, localising C<$/> isn't taken into
account, because he observed that when doing

    print <$fh>;

print() is called as many times as there are lines in the file opened via
C<$fh>. Contrary to the first thoughts, this is unrelated to scalar
context versus list context, but to some internal flags in PerlIO. Stas
then admits to be unable to reproduce the mysterious problem after a perl
upgrade.

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=4047E7B3.8040106%40stason.org

=head2 Some Bugs

Yves Orton produces an error I<Attempt to free unreferenced scalar>
by blessing an anonymous glob (bug #27268), and by assigning the glob
reference to the glob itself:

    perl -MSymbol -e 'my $x=bless \gensym,q/t/; *$$x=$x'

Bug #27344 shows a pos() bug which happens only when taint mode is on.

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=rt-3.0.8-27344-80480.18.8941338152323%40perl.org

Lukas Mai remarks that the C<(;$)> prototype doesn't mimic closely the
way length() is parsed, making it impossible to override fully. (Bug
#27380.)

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=rt-3.0.8-27380-80726.0.626385108255718%40perl.org

Ton Hospel finds that returning the special arrays @+ or @- from a
subroutine don't appear to work correctly. (no bug number for this one.)

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=c26p20$34b$1%40post.home.lunix

=head2 In Brief

Dave Mitchell explains that closures are broken "by design" inside
C</(?{...})/> blocks.

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=20040306155204.GA18953%40fdisolutions.com

Jarkko Hietaniemi provided a patch to significantly speed up case-related
operations with UTF-8 strings (lc(), uc(), //i, etc.).

Christopher Madsen reported that Win32::GetOSVersion() was recently
broken. It was repaired by Steve Hay. (Bug #27357.)

=head2 About this summary

This summary was written by Rafael Garcia-Suarez.  Weekly summaries are
published on F<http://use.perl.org/> and posted on a mailing list, which
subscription address is F<perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org>.  Corrections
and comments are welcome.
