=head1 This Week on perl5-porters (Oct 04-10 2004)

=head2 Crosscompiling perl

Alexander Povolotsky, lacking a native compiler on Linux PPC,
tried to crosscompile from Cygwin (Intel). Many people admonished
that while crosscompiling perl is possible in principle, there's
little support for it, so getting the native compiler in place would
probably be easier.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2004-10/msg00039.html

=head2 Threading crash with closures

John Gardiner Myers reported (bug #31851) a bug in C<threads> where
$thread->join prematurely frees a closure because the CVs' op tree refcount
isn't thread safe. [Please correct this explanation if necessary.]

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2004-10/msg00065.html

=head2 Smoke failing on FreeBSD

Abe Timmerman's new smoke machine, a FreeBSD-running sparc64,
failed with what might be an integer-size configuration problem.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2004-10/msg00071.html

=head2 Weird results from hash assignment with duplicate keys

Boris Zentner, trying to remove duplicate hash values

  %h = reverse (%x = reverse %h);

discovered a fascinating bug (#31865) in assigning duplicate keys to
a hash, pinpointed by Rick Delaney (and Devel::Peeked by Graham Barr):

    $ perl5.8.3 -le 'print (%x = ("a",1,"b",2,"b",3));'
    bb
    $ perl5.6.1 -le 'print (%x = ("a",1,"b",2,"b",3));'
    a1bb3

(should be 'a1b3').

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2004-10/msg00073.html

=head2 Making regcomp a list op

Dave Mitchell set the stage for fixing the behaviors of C<(?{...})> and
regex objects, by making C<regcomp> receive the components of run-time
regexes ($a, '-', $b in C</$a-$b/>) as a list rather than a concatenation
of the components. Commentators oohed and aahed as the chessmaster advanced
his pawn. [If you're an internals novice like me, try understanding Dave's
before and after C<B::Concise> output, using C<B::Concise> (what do the
flags mean?), C<perlguts> (the "Compiled code" section), and C<perlcall>
(what's a C<PUSHMARK>?).]

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2004-10/msg00132.html

=head2 IO::Poll undef fd unchecked in mask method

Peter Dintelmann found a problem (bug #31864) in C<IO::Poll>, where its
C<mask> method incorrectly evaluated an C<undef> argument as 0 (STDIN).

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2004-10/msg00072.html

=head2 Dynaloader improvements and cleanup

Vadim Konovalov continued his Dynaloader patching from the previous
week, and while he was at it enabled statically linked extensions
for Win32. More fixes to come.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2004-10/msg00034.html
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2004-10/msg00126.html

=head2 Releases

Encode 2.03 - Dan Kogai

Module::Build 0.26 - Ken Williams

=head2 Random quote

From Dave Mitchell's sig:

Any [programming] language that doesn't occasionally surprise the
novice will pay for it by continually surprising the expert.
   -- Larry Wall

=head2 Reference

The thread for bug number $BUGNUM can be found at
http://rt.perl.org/rt3/Ticket/Display.html?id=$BUGNUM

=head2 About this summary

This summary was written by Scott Lanning. Summaries are published
weekly at http://use.perl.org/ and posted to a mailing list whose
subscription address is perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org. The archive
is at http://dev.perl.org/perl5/list-summaries/. Comments and
corrections welcome.
