=head1 This Week on perl5-porters (2-8 August 2004)

Another week, another summary, while we're getting unnoticeably older.
(Yes, I just remarked that I started those summaries two years ago.)

=head2 File tests on AIX

David Favor and Rafael investigated the implementation of filetests
operators on AIX (bug #30885), notably regarding access control lists and
how AIX system calls deal with them.

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=rt-3.0.11-30885-92880.10.8131991882473%40perl.org

=head2 Uninitialized versus undefined

Ovid asked whether there was a way, internally, to tell the difference
between a variable that holds the C<undef> value, and a variable that
hasn't been initialized at all. Dave Mitchell says that the short answer
is I<no>, but elaborates a bit.

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=20040804222250.54875.qmail%40web60810.mail.yahoo.com

=head2 Version objects

John Peacock sent the Final Version Object Core Patch. (Minus a small leak
found by Steve Hay.)

Ken Williams initiated a debate on the meaning of the UNIVERSAL::VERSION()
method, when the C<version> module has been loaded. It overloads
UNIVERSAL::VERSION() to return a version object. This annoys
Module::Build. John Peacock argues that $VERSION should not be compared as
a string. Fergal Daly disagrees, saying that $VERSION should not be
compared as a floating point number.

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=3BA4E2DA-E680-11D8-A3F5-000A95BD9874%40mathforum.org

=head2 Releases

Marcus Holland-Moritz released two beta versions of Devel::PPPort 3.
Incidentally, we learn that he has 87 perls installed on his laptop for
his testing needs. However, more tests are welcome.

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=20040808194504.3338d959%40r2d2

Paul Marquess released DB_File 1.810, to solve Cygwin problems.

=head2 In Brief

Rafael removed the "Newline in left-justified string for sprintf" warning.

Fergal Daly added to the C<diagnostics> module the ability to display
stack traces on errors and warnings.

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=20040803233309.GA239%40dyn.fergaldaly.com

Fergal, actually, is apparently writing a stack trace module. While doing
so, he found and reported a bug concerning what happens when you tie %SIG :
it doesn't work until you insert a value in it. (Bug #30926.)

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=rt-3.0.11-30926-93061.2.56136439978242%40perl.org

Andy Lyttle reported that using array indices near C<2**32> wraps around
and results in accesses to the first elements of the array. (Bug #30979.)
As he says, I<that's the sort of weird behavior we expect from C, not from
perl>.

=head2 About this summary

This summary was written by Rafael Garcia-Suarez. Weekly summaries are
published on F<http://use.perl.org/> and posted on a mailing list, which
subscription address is F<perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org>. Comments and
corrections welcome.
