=head1 This Week on perl5-porters (Oct 18-31 2004)

Using newspeak to redefine a week.

=head2 No DESTROY for the wicked coderefs (bug #32024)

C<DESTROY> doesn't get called on non-closure anonymous subroutines
because the C<CV> is shared, but this won't be fixed because of
performance reasons.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2004-10/msg00287.html

This was discussed before:

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-08/msg01300.html

=head2 err and backwards compatibility

Michael Schwern and Robert Spier brought up how the new C<err> keyword
in 5.10 hasn't been properly deprecated. Yitzchak Scott-Thoennes claimed
C<err> is a second-class keyword, while Rafael Garcia-Suarez claimed it
was not. Hm..

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2004-10/msg00378.html
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2004-10/msg00351.html

=head2 is_tainted in 5.8

Stas Bekman suggested an improvement of the C<is_tainted> subroutine
offered in C<perldoc perlsec> for testing whether a variable contains
tainted data. He found that for some reason it was necessary to

  use warnings FATAL => 'all';

to prevent compile-time errors from the C<eval>.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2004-10/msg00305.html

=head2 Chained goto &sub drops data too early (bug #32039)

Henrik Gulbrandsen spotted that patch 22373 in 5.8.4, which was put in
place to fix the C<@_>s in recursive C<goto>s, now causes C<@_> to be
dropped in chained C<goto>s. Dave Mitchell's new solution is to
"transfer the reifiedness of the old @_ to the new @_ then ditch
the old @_".

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2004-10/msg00324.html

=head2 Optimization idea

David Nicol wondered if

   my $name = 'david';
   return "hello my name is $name";

could be optimized with

   return "hello my name is david";

Elizabeth Mattijsen, for one, doubted this would be worth it because of
the complexity of checking when the optimization could be done.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2004-10/msg00376.html

=head2 perldoc -f for ops (bug #27886)

Dan Jacobson dreamed of a world where C<perldoc -f => returns documentation
on the C<=> operator. I think everyone's thought of this at some point,
though it might be better to "ask not what your perldoc can do for you,
ask what you can do for your perldoc".

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2004-10/msg00412.html

=head2 Encode::utf8::decode_xs does not check partial chars

Bjoern Hoehrmann convinced Dan Kogai that

  my $x = "Bj\xF6rn"; # as well as "Bj\xF6r" and "Bj\xF6"
  decode("utf-8", $x, Encode::FB_CROAK);

should croak but wasn't. See

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2004-10/msg00412.html

and I think also bug #32080

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2004-10/msg00375.html

=head2 Perl doesn't support RAII

Anders Johnson submitted four patches for RAII in Perl. Quoth he:
"The central idea of the patches that I submitted is to block (defer)
signal handlers inside the DESTROY call.  That way, you can arrange for
signal handlers to die() without having to worry that the exception
won't get propagated."

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2004-10/msg00423.html
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2004-10/msg00421.html
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2004-10/msg00422.html
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2004-10/msg00424.html

Link from John Peacock on RAII (not to be confused with the RIAA):

  http://www.hackcraft.net/raii/

=head2 In brief

Steve Peters, sedulous bee that he be, commented on at least a dozen
ancient bugs, presumably with the intent of clearing them out.

Nicolas Clark said in a couple threads that he doesn't intend to upgrade
MakeMaker in maint because versions after 6.17 have bugs with core perl.

=head2 References

The thread for bug number $BUGNUM can be found at
http://rt.perl.org/rt3/Ticket/Display.html?id=$BUGNUM

=head2 About this summary

This summary was written by Scott Lanning. Summaries are published
weekly at http://use.perl.org/ and posted to a mailing list whose
subscription address is perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org. The archive
is at http://dev.perl.org/perl5/list-summaries/. Comments and
corrections welcome.
