=head1 TITLE

Named operators versus functions

=head1 VERSION

  Maintainer: Johan Vromans <jvromans@squirrel.nl>
  Date: 4 Aug 2000
  Last Modified: 28 Aug 2000
  Mailing List: perl6-language@perl.org
  Number: 26
  Version: 2
  Status: Frozen

=head1 ABSTRACT

Perl distinguishes named operators and functions. For Perl6, this
disctinction can be dropped.

=head1 DESCRIPTION

Named operators, like C<abs>, can be called like functions in which
case they behave like functions. This has always been so in Perl.

Recent versions of Perl allow user-defined functions to be called as
operators, using context coercion templates to resolve argument
passing.

Larry said: "Theoretically, we'd like to make subs run as fast as ops."

Since there is no real difference between named operators and
functions anymore, they can be treated identically. The difference in
terminology can be applied to how it is called instead of how it is
defined.

So, a I<function> is a user-defined or built-in function called with a
parenthesized list of arguments, and a I<named operator> is a
user-defined or built-in function called with its arguments "bare".
The latter form is subject to the usual restrictions.

Note that this applies to the language aspects. The actual
implementation may be different for user-defined and built-in
functions.

=head1 CHANGES

After the first release we had some discussions on perl6-language. These
discussions didn't add any new insights.  The discussion is over, and
it's now up to Larry to decide.

=head1 REFERENCES

[i] perldoc perlop

