=head1 TITLE

Any scalar can be a hash key

=head1 VERSION

  Maintainer: Steve Fink <steve@fink.com>
  Date: 20 Sep 2000
  Mailing List: perl6-language@perl.org
  Number: 266
  Version: 1
  Status: Developing

=head1 ABSTRACT

References will be allowed as hash keys. Blessed references can
additionally provide their own hash functions and equality tests.

=head1 NOTE

This RFC is probably premature. It needs a lot of firming up, and I
wonder if it would be better targeted to the perl6-language-internals
group. But I want to respect the new RFC freeze date (today). And it
should still serve to focus discussion, IMO the main purpose of an RFC.

Anyone else want to maintain it?

=head1 DESCRIPTION

For nonreferences, nothing will change. For non-blessed references,
just one thing will change: the keys returned by C<keys> and C<each>
will be full scalars instead of just strings. The lookup will behave
as now: if you have two distinct anonymous hash references with
identical contents, they will still be given distinct keys in the
hashtable. However, C<$hash{$ref}> will no longer be equal to
C<$hash{"$ref"}>.

Blessed references (or whatever they become in Perl6) can define a
HASH subroutine that returns an integer. Any two objects whose HASH
functions return different values will never resolve to the same hash
table entry.

Identical HASH functions are not sufficient for resolving to the same
entry. The equality operator C<==> will be used to find matching
values in the table. Thus, in order for two distinct blessed
references to be treated as identical hash keys, they must both define
C<sub HASH> to return the same value and overload C<==> to return true
when either is compared to the other.

If the outcome of the equality test changes while an object is in a
hash table, the results are undefined. (This can happen if the
equality subroutine is redefined, or if internal state that it depends
on changes in either the lookup object or the stored object.) Note
that the equality operator defined by the stored key is irrelevant,
because the probe key's equality test is used during lookup.

The HASH value of a stored object is "frozen" at the moment it is
stored in the hashtable. It may change, but it will be looked up in
the hashtable using the HASH value computed for its insertion.

The number of times the equality and HASH subroutines are called
during any hash operation is undefined.

=head2 WARNING

Note that because C<==> is not constrained to be commutative, the hash
keys no longer form a set of equivalence classes. In other words, it
is possible to get this behavior:

 print $A;            # "an A object"
 print $B;            # "a B object"
 $hash{$A} = $B;
 print $hash{$A};     # "a B object"
 print $hash{$B};     # "a B object"
 $hash{$B} = $A;
 print $hash{$A};     # "an A object"
 print $hash{$B};     # "a B object"

This is because $A==$B but $B!=$A (assuming the search key's equality
operator is called rather than the hash key's). I'm sure some sick,
twisted individual can come up with a practical use for this, but most
of the time it'll be a subtle bug.

=head2 ALTERNATIVES

1. The HASH function could be allowed to return an arbitrary scalar
value. This would slow down operations, because the entire scalar
would need to be hashed once and then compared to every element in the
hash bucket.

2. The HASH value could be allowed to change after an object is
inserted into the hashtable (and the lookup would reflect this new
value.) This would probably be miserable for performance because in
general, every key in the hashtable would need to be recomputed and
compared against on every hashtable operation. This could be improved,
but hardly seems worth it.

3. The equality test could be skipped, and instead lookups would rely
only on the HASH values being identical. This would work, but it seems
difficult in general to boil an object's identity down to a number or
even a string. Still, this seems like the leading contender: it's what
we have now with overloaded stringification, except
C<(keys %h)[0]->foo()> would work.

=head1 IMPLEMENTATION

Dunno. With my vague understanding of the existing code and hash
tables in general:

All hashtables will have a flag bit for each key indicating whether it
is a reference. If not, the memory for the key strings can be shared
(as they are now.) For a key which is a reference, the key will be a
struct with two slots: the HASH value of the key (call it
HASHENT.keyhash) and the actual scalar key (call it HASHENT.key). A
lookup for a probe object will generate a hash of the lookup key and
map it to a bucket in the hashtable. Each of the entries (call an
entry HASHENT) in that bucket will be examined in turn. The lookup
will succeed if HASHENT.keyhash is equal to H and the C<==> operator
of the probe object returns true for HASHENT.key. The first one found
will be returned.

When inserting into a hash bucket, multiple entries with identical
hash values will be left unmolested as long as the inserted key's
equality operator returns false. If probe==HASHENT.key returns true
for more than one HASHENT, at least one will be removed from the table
and replaced with the new entry. (There will be only one unless the
behavior of C<==> changes.)

=head1 REFERENCES

None.
