=head1 TITLE

User-definable POD handling

=head1 VERSION

  Maintainer: Simon Cozens <simon@brecon.co.uk>
  Date: 25 Sep 2000
  Mailing List: perl6-language@perl.org
  Number: 306
  Version: 1
  Status: Developing

=head1 ABSTRACT

Make POD extensible by the new C<=handle>, C<=ignore> and C<=define>
commands.

=head1 DESCRIPTION

One criticism of POD is that it's too restrictive. Three new pragmatic
commands will make it arbitrarily user extensible.

=over 1

=item =handle X as Y [for Z] 

Imagine, if you will, that POD formatters define routines. The
C<=handle> command maps pieces of POD to routines. For instance, if
you're writing a book and you want the C<ZE<gt>E<lt>> command to insert
an index entry, you'd say something like:

    =handle Z<> as index

Of course, not all POD formatters should translate it like that. If they
don't provide the C<index> routine, then they should silently ignore the
command. Alternatively, you may map the command to a routine when a
certain formatter is run like this:

    =handle Z<> as index for tex

The "X" part of the above syntax may also be an equals-command, which
could be used to pass physical markup information to the formatter:

    =handle =head1 as chapter for tex

You might want to take this to extremes, and pass parameters to the
routine. I don't like this, though:

    =handle =head1 as h1 for HTML with font_size => 20, font => courier

=item =ignore X [for Y]

Tells the parser that certain POD constructs should not be processed by
certain formatters:

    =ignore L<> for text


=item =define X [for Y]

Introduces a new construct to be mapped to a routine with C<=handle>.
This allows the parser to verify arbitrary extensions to POD.

    =define =head3
    =handle =head3 as h3 for HTML
    =handle =head3 as subsubsection for tex

=back

=head1 IMPLEMENTATION

C<POD::Parser> will need to be extended to support these three commands;
text which is found in a C<=handle>d area should be passed to a routine
in the formatter if one exists or passed through if one does not.

=head1 REFERENCES

None
