=head1 TITLE

PRAYER - what gets said when you C<bless> something

=head1 VERSION

  Maintainer: Simon Cozens <simon@brecon.co.uk>
  Date: 25 Sep 2000
  Last Modified: 25 Sep 2000
  Mailing List: perl6-language-objects@perl.org
  Number: 307
  Version: 2
  Status: Withdrawn

=head1 NOTES ON WITHDRAWL

Damian Conway noted:

	RFC 189 covers this.

=head1 ABSTRACT

This RFC proposes a special sub, C<PRAYER>, which is automatically called 
on C<bless>ing.

=head1 DESCRIPTION

The abstract more or less says it all, but this is more than just a
joke. Suppose, for instance, your class needs to do some initialisation
whenever a new object is created; C<PRAYER> would be where the class
initialisation takes place.

There's also the more interesting and (IMHO) important issue of
reblessing; that is, changing the class of an object. There are times
when you want to do this, but it's hairy because you have to know the
workings of both classes. However, if you have C<PRAYER> called
automatically on C<bless>ing, you can automagically "cast" objects
between classes. For instance, an object in class X would get changed to
an object in class Y with

    bless $obj, "Y";

Perl would then perform the reblessing and call: 

    package Y;
    sub PRAYER ($object, $oldclass) {
        if ($oldclass eq "X") {
            ...
        } else {
            die "Can't cast an $oldclass to a Y";
        }
    }

You may also use this method as a form of "pre-constructor", or even, on
simple enough classes, a constructor proper.

Maybe subs to cast between classes should somehow be shared between the
two classes; the special sub C<INTERCESSION> would be the obvious place
for that.

=head1 IMPLEMENTATION

Adding a method call to the end of C<bless> should not be tricky.

=head1 REFERENCES

None.
