=head1 TITLE

Handling environment setting in extension modules

=head1 VERSION

  Maintainer: Jonathan Leffler <jleffler@informix.com>
  Date: 25 September 2000
  Mailing List: perl6-internals@perl.org
  Number: 318
  Version: 1
  Status: Developing

=head1 ABSTRACT

The Perl 5 XS mechanism can get confused when the code called by an XS
extension adds to (or alters) the environment.  Perl 6 should not.

=head1 DESCRIPTION

Some Perl 5 XS modules (a case in point is DBD::Informix) use C code
which cannot be modified by the user (commercial libraries distributed
in binary formats only).  This C code contains calls to putenv() or
other mechanisms which modify the environment.  Since Perl also plays
with the environment via %ENV, there is lots of room for confusion and
corruption.

Neither POSIX.1 nor POSIX.2 defines a function for setting environment
variables.  In fact, there is not even a header which declares the
'extern char **environ;' variable -- the only C object mandated by POSIX
without such a header.  The Single Unix Specification does require the
putenv() function, but POSIX-compliant (only) libraries could use some
other mechanism -- a home-brew analogue of putenv() -- to modify the
environment.

The Perl 6 extension mechanisms should circumvent this problem.  There
are at least two possible ways to do it: the magic, and the mundane.

=head2 Magic

If Perl 6 is to perform magic, it must somehow track the complete
environment through environ, and ensure that the environment has not
been changed since Perl last modified the environment.  If the
environment has changed, then Perl must resynchronize %ENV with the
current contents of 'environ'.  Further, Perl must ensure that 'environ'
contains everything in %ENV at all times.  Obviously, there are only a
limited number of places where such behind-the-scenes manipulation would
occur.  Code that is directly written to work with XS would (presumably)
be commanded to modify the %ENV hash via the equivalents to the
HV-routines documented in perlguts.  So, it is only when that code calls
out to vendor-provided binary libraries that the problem can occur.
Determining when that is what is happening is why it requires magic.

=head2 Mundane

If Perl 6 is unable to perform the magic cost-effectively, Perl 6 should
provide extension authors with a mechanism for letting Perl 6 know when
the environment may have been modified from within extensions.  One
possible interface, requiring cooperation from the module author, would
be a pair of functions, mark_environment() and fixup_environment() --
the names don't matter but the functionality does.

Before calling the library code that might change the environment, the
extension would call mark_environment() to tell Perl 6 that the
environment might be changed surreptitiously.  Perl could do some sort
of check-summing or other analysis of the current environment, and the
result of the analysis might be returned as a value of some sort for use
with fixup_environment().

The extension would then call the library code that might modify the
environment.  When that code returns, the extension would call
fixup_environment() would use the information stashed by
mark_environment() to recognize whether the environment has been changed
and to reconcile the Perl internal representation of %ENV with what has
been modified.

If Perl provides its own variant on putenv(), would the extensions always
call it automatically?

=head1 IMPLEMENTATION

The magical implementation, requiring no help from the module author, is
unlikely to be doable at an acceptable cost.  I don't have any real
information on what might be required.

The mundane implementation can probably be made to work without undue
hardship; the biggest problem area could be memory leaks caused by the
conservative decisions the code might need to make if the called code
changes the list of pointers that environ points to, because of the
defined behaviour of the putenv() function).

=head1 REFERENCES

POSIX.1 IEEE Std 1003.1, 1996 (aka ISO/IEC 9945-1:1996): Information
technology - Portable Operating System Interface (POSIX) - Part 1:
System Application Program Interface (API) [C Language].

POSIX.2 IEEE Std 1003.2, 199x (aka ISO/IEC 9945-2:199x): Information
technology - Portable Operating System Interface (POSIX) - Part 2:
...(rest of title to be filled in)...

The Unix System Today (ISBN 1-85912-296-5, Open Group, June 2000).
http://www.opengroup.org/

Various discussions at various times in perl5-porters mailing list.
...[details can be dug out of private email archives if relevant]...

