=head1 TITLE

Consolidate the $1 and C<\1> notations

=head1 VERSION

  Maintainer: David Storrs <dstorrs@dstorrs.com>
  Date: 28 Sep 2000
  Last Modified: 30 Sep 2000
  Mailing List: perl6-language-regex@perl.org
  Number: 331
  Version: 2
  Status: Frozen

=head1 ABSTRACT

Currently, C<\1> and $1 have only slightly different meanings within a
regex.  It is possible to consolidate them without losing any
functionality and, in the process, we gain intuitiveness.

=head1 CHANGES

v1->v2:  
A major rewrite:

=over 4

=item *
Reformatted the argument into "The Problem" and "The Solution" sections

=item *
Added "Some Examples" section

=item *
Added "Why do this?" section

=item *
Added "P526 migration" section

=item *
Proposed the @/ variable

=item *
Various trivial edits and typo-fixs

=back


=head1 DESCRIPTION

Note:  For convenience, I am going to talk about C<\1> and $1 in this RFC.
In actuality, these notations extend indefinitely:  C<\1..\n> and
C<$1..$n>.  Take it as read that anything which applies to $1 also applies
to C<$2, $3>, etc.


=head2 The Problem

In current versions of Perl, C<\1> and C<$1> mean different things.
Specifically, C<\1> means "whatever was matched by the first set of
grouping parens I<in this regex match>."  $1 means "whatever was matched
by the first set of grouping parens I<in the previously-run regex match>."
For example:

=over 4

=item *
C</(foo)_$1_bar/>

=item *
C</(foo)_\1_bar/>

=back

the second will match 'foo_foo_bar', while the first will match
'foo_[SOMETHING]_bar' where [SOMETHING] is whatever was captured in the
B<previous> match...which could be a long, long way away, possibly even in
some module that you didn't even realize you were including (because it
was included by a module that was included by a module that was included
by a...).

The primary reason for this distinction is s///, in which the left hand
side is a pattern while the right hand side is a string (assuming no 'e'
modifier).  Therefore:

=over 4

=item *
C<s/(foo)$1/$1bar/ # changes "foo???" to "foobar" where ??? is from the
last match>

=item *
C<s/(foo)\1/$1bar/ # changes "foofoo" to "foobar">

=back

Note that, in the first example, the two $1s refer to different things,
whereas in the second example, $1 and C<\1> refer to the same thing.  This
is counterintuitive and non-Perlish; Perl should be intuitive and DWIMish.

A separate, though less important, problem with the way backreferences are
currently implemented is that it is difficult for a human to tell at a
glance whether \10 means "escape character 10" or "backreference 10"...the
only way to tell is to count the number of captured elements and see if
there actually are ten of them, in which case \10 is a backreference and
otherwise it is an escape character.  In general, this isn't a problem
because most patterns don't have ten sets of capturing parens.


=head2 The Solution

Ok, so the problem is that $1 and C<\1> are counterintuitive.  How do we
make them intuitive without losing any functionality?

First, let's get rid of the C<\1> form for backreferences.

Second, let's say that $n refers to the nth captured subelement of the
pattern match which occured in this B<statement>--note that this is
distinct from "in this pattern match."  That means that, in
C<s/(foo)$1/$1bar/>, both $1s refer to the same thing (the string 'foo'),
even though one of them occured inside a pattern and one occured inside a
string.  (See note [1] in the IMPLEMENTATION section.)

Third, let's create a new special variable, @/ (mnemonic: the / is the
default delimiter for a pattern match; if the English module remains
extant, then @/ could have the long name of @LAST_MATCH, but there are
currently several threads concerning removal of the English module). Much
like the current C<$1, $2...> variables, this array will only be created
(and hence, the speed price will only be paid), if you access its members.
The 0th element of @/ will contain the qr()d form of the last pattern
match, while successive elements refer to the captured subelements.

Fourth, let's change when we update the variables which store the captures
(the current C<$1, $2>, etc).  @/ will only be updated when the entire
statement which contains a pattern match has finished running (e.g., when
the entire s/// is completed), rather than as soon as the pattern match is
done (and therefore before the substitution happens).  


=head2 Some Examples

=over 4

=item 1
If you did the following:

C<"Bilbo Baggins" =~ /((\w+)\s+(\w+))/>

Then @/ would contain the following:

C<$/[0]> the compiled equivalent of C</((\w+)\s+(\w+))/>, 

C<$/[1]> the string "Bilbo Baggins"

C<$/[2]> the string "Bilbo"

C<$/[3]> the string "Baggins"

Note that after the match, C<$/[1]>, C<$/[2]>, and C<$/[3]> contain
exactly what C<$1, $2>, and C<$3> would contain with present-day syntax.
Furthermore, the compiled form of the match is available so if you want to
repeat the match later (or insert it into a larger regex), you can simply
refer to it as $/[0].


=item 2
With references to the previous regex being handled by the @/ variable, we
are free to use $1 for the current statement only.  Therefore:

C<s/(\w+)\s+$1/$1/ # eliminate doubled words>
C<print "Found doubled word: $/[1]\n";> 

Note that in the substitution, both of the $1's refer to the same thing,
eliminating confusion.  

=item 3

C<$pal = m/((\w+)(?{ reverse $2 }))/g # locate first palindrome>

C<[@/ is effectively updated here]>

C<print pos();>

=item 4

C<@pals = m/((\w+)(?{ reverse $2 }))/g # locate all palindromes>

In this case, @/ would ideally only be updated for the last-matched
palindrome.  I am not familiar with how the internals of /g work
however--if it is implemented effectively as a loop, we might have to
update @/ every time a match was found, which would be a tremendous speed
penalty.  In this case, there should be a way to turn off storage to @/
within the local block...perhaps a special value that it can be set to
which serves as a "don't do this" flag.


=head2 Why do this?

This prime intent of this RFC is not to add, subtract, or change
functionality.  Instead, the primary intent is to change the names of
things which already exist inside Perl regexs.  Surely renaming things
just for the sake of renaming them is a Bad Thing?

Except that that isn't what's happening.  This RFC does B<not> propose
renaming things for the sake of renaming them.  It proposes regularizing a
confusing set of syntax, increasing the intuitiveness of how
backreferences in general and s/// in particular work, and adding a
convenient bit of functionality in the $/[0] element.  As things stand,
both \1 and $1 in s/(foo)\1_bar/$1_bar/ refer to the same thing, but they
look different.  Under this RFC, they would refer to the same thing, and
they would look the same.


=head1 IMPLEMENTATION

[1] At the moment, perl does two passes when building a pattern match; the
first pass interpolates in any variables that occur in the pattern, while
the second compiles the pattern.  If this RFC is adopted, then perl must
be smart enough not to interpolate any scalar variables whose names
consist purely of digits.  This should not be difficult, nor should it
break much existing user code, since the digit-only scalars are used by
perl to store the results of pattern captures.

=head2 P526 migration

In general, whereever the P526 translator saw a $1 in a pattern or string,
it would substitute it with $/[1]. The only exception to this would be
when $1 was encountered on the RHS of an s///, in which case it would be
left unchanged.


=head1 REFERENCES

RFC 112: "Assignment within a regex"

RFC 276: "Localizing paren counts in qr()s"  (tangential interest only)

perlre manpage






