=head1 TITLE

Exception handling syntax

=head1 VERSION

  Maintainer: Peter Scott <peter@psdt.com>
  Date: 8 Aug 2000
  Last Modified: 23 Aug 2000
  Mailing List: perl6-language-errors@perl.org
  Number: 63
  Version: 4
  Status: Retired
  Replaced-By: 88

=head1 ABSTRACT

This RFC has been merged into RFC 88.  The text of the last version
prior to the merge is left below for archival purposes only.  Anyone
interested in browsing this for historical reasons probably has way
too much time on their hands :-)

This RFC proposes an exception handling syntax for Perl 6.  It was
originally adapted from Graham Barr's C<Error.pm> module, but it's
been modified enough since then that he might not want the blame by
association :-)

=head1 DESCRIPTION

An exception handling mechanism is proposed with the following syntax:

       exception EXCEPTION

       try BLOCK catch [EXCEPTION [, ...] ] BLOCK ...
       try BLOCK catch [EXCEPTION [, ...] ] BLOCK ... continue BLOCK
       try BLOCK catch EXPR BLOCK ...
       try BLOCK catch EXPR BLOCK ... continue BLOCK
       try BLOCK continue BLOCK

       throw EXCEPTION [ (attributes) ]
       throw EXPR

=head2 Flow of control

1. When an exception is thrown perl looks for the enclosing C<try> block; 
if there is none then program C<die>s with the text in the C<message> 
attribute of the exception,
which is what the exception stringifies to.

2. If there is an enclosing C<try> block perl goes through the associated 
C<catch> blocks in order. If the C<catch> criteria succeed (the exception 
class matches one in a list, or a C<catch> expression evaluates to true, or 
the C<catch> block catches everything), the C<catch> block is executed. If 
the C<catch> block throws an exception, it becomes the 'current' exception 
(with a link to the previous one), otherwise there is no longer a current 
exception.

3. Whether or not a catch block was executed, the C<continue> block is now 
executed if there is one. If the C<continue> block throws an exception, it 
becomes the 'current' exception (with a link to the previous one if there 
was one). At this point, if there is a current exception, go to step 1.

The exception object is passed into each block in C<$_[0]>.

Note that C<try> is a keyword, not a function.  This is solely so that
a C<;> is not needed at the end of the last block, since so many people
are bound to think it shouldn't be there and forget.

C<try>, C<catch>, and C<continue> blocks share the same lexical scope, in 
the same way that C<while> and C<continue> currently do.  This is so that 
variables (e.g., filehandles) defined in the C<try> block can be operated 
on in the other blocks.

There is debate over whether C<try> should be C<eval> so as not to use
another keyword.  Since it has different semantics (rethrows uncaught
exceptions), it should not be C<eval>; but if this happens, then surely
C<eval BLOCK> should be retired since it is so similar there would be
confusion over what to use for exception handling.  And no-one would
get the semicolons right :-)

While C<try> and C<catch> are new keywords, C<throw> and C<exception>
don't need to be; they're just functions.

=head2 Exceptions

Exceptions are objects belonging to some C<Exception> class.  C<throw>ing
an exception creates the object; therefore, C<EXCEPTION> above is just a
class name (possibly including some C<::>).

The C<exception> function is just syntactic sugar for creating a new
exception class;it merely amounts to C<@EXCEPTION::ISA = 'Exception'>.

C<throw> takes as argument either an exception class and attributes (could 
be implemented as a class method with indirect object syntax) or an 
expression evaluating to an exception object (could be implemented as core 
function).

=head2 Exception classes - rethrowing

RFC 80 proposes standard exception classes and methods for core exceptions.
This RFC doesn't need to repeat those, but it can expound upon the
semantics that exception classes ought to have.  Assume wlog that they
all inherit from a base class, C<Exception>.  Some people think that
exceptions should not be rethrown implicitly.  We can provide a boolean flag
in the class or even the exception object itself to be checked for this:

      sub Exception::IO::implicit_rethrow { 0 }        # One class
      sub Exception::implicit_rethrow     { 0 }        # All classes
      throw Exception::Socket(implicit_rethrow => 0);  # Just this exception

[Note: it had been proposed that this functionality would be provided by a
method C<uncaught_handler> which would be called if an exception wasn't
caught.  But if that routine decided to rethrow the exception, the 
C<continue> block
would not get called at the right time.  However, there are objections to 
the "action-at-a-distance" semantics of the above proposal.]

=head2 Exception classes - ignoring

Note that we could also make it possible to selectively or globally ignore
exceptions, so that perl continues executing the line after the C<throw>
statement.  Just import a C<ignore> function that takes a class name:

      ignore Exception::IO;     # Ignore all I/O exceptions
      ignore Exception;         # Ignore all exceptions

and when perl sees the C<throw>, it just does nothing.  (Or do it by
overriding a base class method as for C<implicit_rethrow> if you don't want
to put another function in the namespace.)  Since C<throw> and C<die>
should be essentially identical, this would allow any kind of exception to
be ignored, not just the ones that were C<throw>n.  There is violent 
opposition to this proposal; I should note, though, that even if it were 
not implemented, it might well be possible not to avoid people doing it by 
overriding the C<throw> function in one or more exception classes.

=head2 Examples

These examples assume some core exception classes, although the
mechanism can be implemented even if core exception classes aren't.
The nature of exceptions is that they are most useful on lengthy code;
code brief enough to be a readable example also makes a functionally
poor example.

       exception Exception::MyDB;
       sub foo {
           open_database();
           # database-munging code
           throw Exception::MyDB(message => 'permission denied');
           close_database();
           open_network_connection();
           # network munging code
           throw Exception::IO(message => 'timeout');  #  In Socket.pm, perhaps
           close_network_connection();
           }

       try {
           foo();
       } catch Exception::MyDB, Exception::DBI {
           close_database();
           # other stuff
       } catch Exception::IO {
           close_network_connection();
           # other stuff
       } catch {
           my $err = shift;
           warn "Some other kind of error in foo: $err\n";
           throw $err;      # Re-throw exception (just 'cuz we wanted to)
       }

=head1 IMPLEMENTATION

A C<throw> is just a C<die> passed an object that stringifies to the
message you will die with if nothing catches the exception; therefore
users can use code that throws exceptions without using the exception-handling
mechanism.  They should also be able to wrap a C<try> block around code
that doesn't know about exceptions but does call C<die>, and have that
caught as well; perl should turn the C<die> text into an exception object
with the same text, in the base C<Exception> class.

=head2 $SIG{__DIE__}

Many people want <$SIG{__DIE__}> to be axed altogether, since it fires 
immediately when anything throws an exception, rather than being a handler 
of last resort.  If a C<try> block implicitly does C<local $SIG{__DIE__}>, 
it could protect itself, though.  So this RFC doesn't

=head1 NOTES

This RFC is very similar to RFC 88, which has slightly different syntax
and adds functionality for adding exceptions to a stack.  While this author
considers that to be going a bit too far (he's tried it before and found he
never made use of anything under the top level of the stack), he wouldn't
mind if RFC 88 got adopted instead.

This RFC is attempting to stake out a more minimalist position.  Some people
think it should be even more minimal by using C<eval> instead of C<try>, and
an C<else> instead of multiple C<catch> blocks.  One advantage of their
approach is that you can use an expression for the exception you wish to
catch in a C<switch> block:

      eval { ... }
      else {
          switch ($@) {
              case ^_->isa('Exception::IO') { ... }
              case ^_->my_method            { ... }
      }

Now in this case, the problem arises, how should the code implicitly 
rethrow uncaught exceptions?  Without having to look inside the C<switch> 
statement to see what it did?  Most of the proponents of this model think 
that uncaught exceptions should not be implicitly rethrown; one suggests 
that the programmer should C<undef $@> at the end of every successful 
<case> block, so that perl rethrows any C<$@> still extant at the end of 
the C<else>.  This is a quite excellent suggestion that should be 
considered if this proposal is evaluated as requiring too many new 
keywords: our objection to it is that it requires the programmer to insert 
C<undef $@> in every instance of by far the the most common type of clause.

=head1 REFERENCES

Error.pm (C<http://search.cpan.org/doc/GBARR/Error-0.13/Error.pm>)

RFC 80: Exception objects and classes for builtins

RFC 88: Structured Exception Handling Mechanism (Try)
