=head1 TITLE

Higher resolution time values

=head1 VERSION

  Maintainer: Gisle Aas <gisle@ActiveState.com>
  Date: 2 Aug 2000
  Mailing List: perl6-language@perl.org
  Number: 7
  Version: 1
  Status: Developing

=head1 ABSTRACT

All functions that return time values (seconds since epoch) should use
floating point numbers to return as much precision as the platform
supports.  All functions that take time values as arguments should
work for fractional seconds if the platform supports it.

=head1 DESCRIPTION

Perl5 only support 1 second resolution on time values.  In order to
get higher resolution timing an external module (Time::HiRes)
currently need to be used.  This situation ought to be improved in
perl6.

All functions that return time values (seconds since epoch) should use
floating point numbers to return as much precision as the platform
supports.  This include the following builtin functions:

  time
  stat    /* atime, mtime and ctime fields */
  times   /* already float */

All functions that take time values as arguments should work for
fractional seconds if the platform supports it.  This include the
following builtin functions:

  sleep
  alarm
  utime

One problem with using doubles to represent time values is that it
will not always be able to represent all of the time precision that
the platform actually support.  For instance time() value with Unix
epoch represented with 15 decimal digit float precision will only
support around 10 µs resolution for current timestamps.

=head1 IMPLEMENTATION

Should be straight forward.  Configure might need to figure out some
more about what hires-timer interfaces are available if it does not
already do this.

=head1 PERL5 PORTABILITY

Calls to time() could be transformed to int(time()) when converting
perl5 programs to perl6.

=head1 REFERENCES

Time::HiRes module on CPAN


