=head1 TITLE

Improved Module Versioning And Searching

=head1 VERSION

  Maintainer: Steve Simmons <scs@ans.net>
  Date: 8 Aug 2000
  Mailing List: perl6-language@perl.org
  Number: 78
  Version: 1
  Status: Developing

=head1 ABSTRACT

Modern production systems may have many versions of different modules
in use simultaneously.  Workarounds are possible, but they lead to
a vast spaghetti of fragile installation webs.  This proposal will
attempt to redefine module versioning and its handling in a way that
is fully upward compatible but solves the current problems.

An up-to-the-instant version of this RFC will be posted as HTML
at C<http://www.nnaf.net/~scs/Perl6/RFCxx.html> as soon as I
know the RFC number.

=head1 DESCRIPTION

There are several classes of problem with the current module
versioning and searching, which will be discussed separately.
The solutions proposed overlap, and are discussed in
B<IMPLEMENTATION> below.

=head2 Current Implementation Is Broken

These problems are ones in which I would go so far as to say that
the current (C<perl5>) performance is actually broken.

=head3 Discovery Of Older Versions Aborts Searches

Currently a statement

  use  foo 1.2;

can cause C<perl> to search C<@INC> until it finds a C<foo.pm> file
or exhausts the search path.  When a C<foo.pm>, its C<VERSION>
is checked against the one requested in the C<use> statement.
If the C<foo.pm> version is less than 1.2, C<perl> immediately
gives an error message and halts the compilation.
A satisfactory version may exist elsewhere in C<@INC>, but it is
not searched for.

=head3 First Module Discovered May Not Be Newest

I believe that when a programmer writes

    use module;

`Do What I Mean' should find the newest version of the module present on the
C<@INC> search path.
Instead, the very first C<module.pm> file found is taken,
regardless of the presence of others on the path.

=head2 Current Methods Are Insufficient for Complex Installations

Deployment of perl modules in high-reliability or widely shared
environments often requires multiple versions of modules installed
simultaneously.
(Comments `but that's a bad idea' will be cheerfully ignored --
if I could control what other departments need, I would).
This leads to an endless proliferation of C<use lib> directories
and ever-more-pervasive `silos of development.'

Part of the problem is the limitations of the current system in
how modules are versioned and how C<perl> decides which version
to load.  In worst case, code such as

    use lib '/path/to/department/module/versionX';
    use module ;	# To get version X for sure
    no use lib '/path/to/department/module/versionX';

has been found in production equipment.
Why does such bogosity occur?
It's an attempt to solve both the above problems and
the deployment issues which follow below.

=head3 New Module Releases Can Break Existing Scripts

I<Working tools persist.>
An application which does its job well will live as long as the
problem it addresses.
This means old code may continue running for a long time.

For C<perl> itself, most sites solve this problem by having
the perl invocation include versioning:

   #!/usr/bin/perl5.005

The indicated version will likely remain installed and stable as long
as the script which uses it and the platform on which that script runs.

The proliferation and increasing use of modules is generally a
good thing.  However, installation of new modules can and sometimes
does break existing scripts.  Workarounds for this problem are
cumbersome at best, and we have existence proofs in other languages
that this can be handled better (notably C<tcl>, but there are
probably more).

=head3 Test Systems Need Test Modules

Mission-critical scripts often need to have a final test pass
by releasing experimental versions onto productions systems
alongside the production systems.

The inflexibility of perl module versioning also contributes to
difficulties in releasing systems for test.  A new script may require
significant changes to internals of one or more supporting modules.
The changes need not be visible to existing scripts; if bugs are introduced
then previously working systems may change or break in obscure ways.

Ideally, there would be a mechanism by which C<scriptI<.new>> or
C<I<new>script> could be released
simultaneously with an appropriate version of C<moduleI<.new>.pm>
or C<I<new>module.pm>
while the previous version
remains in place for older code.
A more flexible mechanism for module version specification
and searching can fix the problem. 

=head2 Proposed Solution

I believe that relatively simple changes can be made to the version
identification and module installation systems which will solve all
the above problems.
In addition, those changes should be largely upward compatible
from current functioning; and if needed could be made 100% 
compatible.

=head1 IMPLEMENTATION

Several changes, working together, should provide the flexibility
needed to solve all the stated problems and deficiencies:

=over4

=item 1.

Clarification on how version numbers are formed (largely done
as per C<perl5.6>)

=item 2.

Well-defined rules for version number comparison.

=item 3.

Extensions to the C<use module I<version>> syntax to support
better specification of version numbers.

=item 4.

A modification to the module installation mechanism to make
version numbers more immediately recognizable without requiring
parsing/compiling of C<module.pm> files.

=item 5.

Modifications to the C<@INC> path searching rules to reflect the
changes in numbers 1-4 above.

=back

We believe that most if not all of these changes can be made without
requiring a change either to older scripts, existing modules, or
items already in CPAN.
New scripts and new modules should be able to take advantage of the
changes with relatively minimal changes.

=head2 Overview

In brief, I propose the installation method for modules as provided
by C<perl Makefile.PL> be changed such that version numbers appear
in the path of the module being installed.  This would require that
the C<Makefile.PL> support functions open the module, extract the
value of C<$VERSION> (if any), and use that to build the pathnames
to install the module.

This change has two huge wins:

=over 4

=item

Authors of modules would have to do literally I<nothing> to use
the new mechanism.

=item

Having the version numbers embedded in the path means they could be
reliably determined without having to actually
open and parse each candidate C<.pm> file.

=back

Programs which request versions in their C<use module> statements
would be compiled with the ``best fit'' commensurate with their
request and with the request of other modules.

Note that it may not be possible to satisfy conflicting requests.  If
module C<A> and module C<B> demand two different versions of the same
module C<C>, the compiler should halt and state the module conflicts.

``Best fit'' cannot reliably be determined without examining all
the secondary modules required as a consequence of using some
lower-level module and without processing the C<@INC> changes
introduced by C<use lib>, etc.
Thus the compiler might have to examine the internals of a number
of versions of some modules before choosing which to use.
But it would not have to do a full parse of those modules,
and the section on B<Possible Optimization - Indexes> suggests
some further wins.

=head2 Path/Module Renaming

There are a variety of mechanisms which could embed the
version number into the path name.
This RFC does not strongly favor any one over any other.
It does have some general suggestions, but is not imposing
a particular solution.

Here are some guidelines for choosing a naming system:

=over 4

=item *

The new names should do minimal violence to the existing structure.
The following guidelines are suggestions, the implementers should
feel free to follow any of the possible implementations (see below)
or choose another as they please.
In the discussion below, I<pathname> means
the full path from file system root to the actual file containing
the module.

=item *

The new names should allow for version-less modules, indicated
by a versionless pathname.

=item *

The C<.pm> filename extension should be preserved.  Thus
it is probably better to embed the version number into the file
name or a directory name immediately above it on the search path.

=item *

If a module is selected for compilation and
a mismatch is found between installed name (eg, C<foo-1.0.pm>) and
the setting in the C<VERSION> statement (eg, C<VERSION=1.1;>),
C<perl6> should issue a compile-time error which includes the full path
to the module and the internal C<VERSION> number.
No recovery should be done.

=back

Here are some possible implementations:

=over 4

=item *

In locations where a C<foo.pm> file would currently be installed,
replace it with a C<foo.pm> directory.
In that directory, versioned modules would be installed as
C<foo-version.pm>, and versionless as C<foo.pm>.
or as C<version.pm> and C<none.pm>

=item *

Create a C<foo.pm> directory as above, but populate it
with subdirectories for each installed version.
A C<foo.pm> file containing the module code would reside
in that directory.
Versionless modules could be installed into the C<foo.pm>
directory rather than in a subdirectory.
This mechanisms has some possible wins should it be
appropriate to support simultaneous load of multiple versions.

=back

=head2 Definition Of Version Numbers

A detailed definition of a version number appears immediately below.
It is my belief that this definition and usage is an upward extension
from current C<perl> performance; and therefore simple (current) use
of version numbers should work without requiring script code change
under this proposal.

Note we are not I<requiring> version numbers, just specifying
format and comparison rules.

=over 4

=item 1.

Version numbers consist of one or more I<version levels> separated
by dots.

=item 2.

Each version level must consist of a non-negative number expressed
as a series of the digits, ie C<[0-9]+>.

=item 3.

The first version level and first dot are required.

=item 4.

There is no limit to how many levels a version may have.

=item 5.

If a version number ends in a dot, a final level of C<0> is assumed.

=item 6.

Leading zeros are allowed in level numbers, but are ignored.
If a version level contains leading zeros, those zeros will be
stripped in all cases except for version(s) C<0.*>.

=item 7.

Trailing zeros in version numbers, whether explicit or implied by
a final dot, are trimmed from the version number internally when
deriving paths.
See above for pathname deriving.

=back

The following example shows some valid and invalid version numbers

    use   foo  1.;	# Valid, means '1.0'
    use   foo  01.;	# Valid, means '1.0'
    use   foo  1.1;	# Valid, means '1.1'
    use   foo  1.01;	# Valid, means '1.1'
    use   foo  1.01.;	# Valid, means '1.1.0'
    use   foo  1.1e;	# Invalid, has non-digit
    use   foo  .1;	# Invalid, must start with explicit level
    use   foo  0.1;	# Valid, means '0.1'
    use   foo  1;	# Invalid, must have at least one dot
    use   foo  1.-1;	# Invalid, no negative numbers (and not a digit)
    use   foo  ;	# Valid, means no version specified

Invalid version numbers cause a compile-time error on the module.

=head2 Usage in Programs

The existing version request syntax is:

   use module [ version ] [ qw(func1 func2 func3)] ;

Currently version is a single C<perl>-style version number (whatever
the heck that means).  I propose we extend the allowable forms to allow
ranges, lists, limits, and version limiting.
Doing this properly requires
some well-defined mechanisms for comparing disparate version numbers.

Version numbers may appear in the C<use> statement of C<perl> scripts
and in the C<VERSION> statement of a C<perl> modules.

They may either be quoted strings or barewords.

Usage in any other circumstance is not treated as a version number,
but rather the appropriate C<perl> construct for the circumstances.
If a bareword, it is almost certainly an error.

I believe that this usage is consistent with current C<perl>.

=head3 Ordered and Unordered Version Lists

A program can specify a list of versions in no-preference order
by listing them separated by whitespace:

    use   foo 1.0 1.1 1.3;
    use   foo 1.3 1.1 1.0;

These two requests are effectively identical, with the
compiler accepting any version of C<foo.pm>
beginning with 1.0, 1.1 or 1.3.

A program can specify a list of versions in preference order
by adding commas:

    use   foo 1.0, 1.1, 1.3;
    use   foo 1.3, 1.1, 1.0;

In these cases the compiler can proceed if any of the three
versions are available.  In the first case some version 1.0 is
preferred, the the second 1.3 is preferred.

The whitespace following the commas is optional.

In cases where there are requests for two different versions of
module C<foo>, both of which were first in the request orders,
the highest-level module (closest to the original script) shall
win.

If both requests are at the same level offset from the original
script, the first requester shall win.

=head3 Version Inequalities

A program can indicate a minimum, maximum, exact,
and super-exact version it will accept.
The following syntax handles these requests:

The form

    use foo <1.2;

indicates that any version prior to 1.2 is acceptable.
This would mean any version with 1.1 or less
for its first two levels.

The form

    use foo <=1.2;

indicates that any version prior to 1.2 is acceptable.
This would mean any version with 1.2 or
less for its first two levels.

The form

    use foo >1.2

indicates that any version greater than 1.2 is acceptable.
This would mean any version with 1.3 or more for its first two levels.

The form

    use foo >=1.2

indicates that any version greater than or equal to 1.2 is acceptable.
This would mean any version with has 1.2 or more as the first two levels.

The form

    use foo =1.2

indicates that only versions which begins with 1.2 are acceptable.

These may be further tightened by ending the version number in a period.
The period forces the rest of the version levels to always be treated
at zeros.  Thus the form

    use foo =1.2.

indicates that only version 1.2.0 is acceptable, not 1.2.0.0...1.

=head3 Ordered and Unordered Version Ranges

A program should be able to use two version numbers
to indicate a range of acceptable version numbers.  The
separator between the two ranges indicates preference order, with

=over 4

=item -

meaning no preference,

=item <

meaning the right hand side is preferred, and

=item >

meaning the left hand side is preferred.

=back

No whitespace is allowed between the separator and the
version number; reasons for this will become apparent in
the sections on complex lists.

Examples of ranges:

    use foo 1.1-1.4

means that any version which begins with 1 and has a 1.4 as the
second level is acceptable.

    use foo 1.1<1.4

means that any version which begins with 1 and has a 1.4 as the
second level is acceptable, with preference given to the highest
version in the range.

    use foo 1.1>1.4

means that any version which begins with 1 and has a 1.4 as the
second level is acceptable, with reference given to the lowest
version in the range.

A terminating dot may be used as well, so that

    use foo 1.1-1.4.

means that any version 1.1 through 1.3 is acceptable, but the only
acceptable 1.4 version is 1.4.0.

=head3 Combining Lists and Ranges

Lists and ranges may be combined in arbitrary ways to make complex
preference sets.  Thus

    use   foo 1.5 1.0-1.3;

means that any version 1.0, 1.1, 1.2, 1.3 or 1.5 is acceptable,
without preference order.  By contrast,

    use   foo 1.5, 1.0-1.3, 1.4;

means that 1.5 is preferred, then anything in the 1.0 to 1.3 range,
then 1.4.

=head3 Why Not Regexps?

It has been suggested that C<globs> or even full-bore regular
expressions be allowed for version specification.  It has not
been included for the following reasons:

=over 4

=item *

Version numbers are an ordered set of positive integers.
As such, simple comparisons are powerful enough to handle
most needs.

=item *

Regexps do not allow for a mechanism to order preference within
a given regexp, ie, one could not write

    use foo 1.[023]

and indicate that there was some ordering to the sub-version.  I
am concerned that people would naively expect that the Do What I
Mean principle would cause C<perl> to assume that the following

    use foo 1.[203]

is equivalent to

    use foo 1.2, 1.0, 1.3

on the naive theory that the two regexps look different so they should
do something different.

=item *

We don't allow regexps in other non-run-time constructs, we shouldn't
allow them here.

=item *

The use of the . as a terminator would seem to be sufficient for
all cases where C<globs> have been suggested.
Having more than one mechanism for this would intermediate C<perl>
programmers to assume that there was some subtle difference between
the two.

=back

Since regexps and C<globs> bring little additional utility and
introduce possible confusion, I have chosen not to put them in
this suggestion.

=head2 Resolving Version Request Problems

=head3 When Nothing Works

When we permit modules to request only certain versions of
other modules, we will find cases where no version of
module C<foo> is acceptable to all modules which wish to use it.
In such as case, the compiler should give up with an error
message stating that due to conflicting version requests,
module C<foo> could not be loaded.  This could
become The Error Message From Hell if sufficient detail was
included.

A utility (perl module?!) should be provided which
would recursively examine the C<use> lines a perl script
and the system configuration and produces the appropriately
voluminous output report.

=head3 When More Than One Acceptable Version Is Found

Modules load modules load modules, ad nauseum.  It is quite
possible that two or more different modules will request some
other module.  If there is only one version which satisfies all
the requests, we don't have a problem.

If there is more than one version acceptable to all callers,
we choose which to use based on the following rules:

=over 4

=item 1.

If no preference was expressed, first acceptable version that was
found is used.

=item 2.

If a preference was expressed, highest preference is given to the
requests which come from the original script.

=item 3.

If no request came from the original script, highest preference
is given to second-level requesters.
If there is more than one second-level requester, the first requesters
preferences are used.
If there are no second-level requester, the third level is used, and so on.

=back

=head2 How This Solves The Problems

There were four problems identified with the current system.
Implementation of this proposal solves those problems as follows:

=head3 Discovery Of Older Versions No Longer Aborts Searches

The statement

  use  foo 1.2;

can cause C<perl> to search C<@INC> until it finds the first
C<foo.pm> file of version 1.2 or greater.

=head3 Programmer Can Now Specify Newest Module

I believe that when a programmer writes

    use module;

`Do What I Mean' should find the newest version of the module present
in C<@INC>.
The current proposal does I<not> cause this to occur,
and thereby permits backwards-compatible behavior.

However, the programmer can now write

    use module >=0.0;

and accept any module, but give preference to the highest.

=head3 New Module Releases Can Break Existing Scripts

This proposal does not prevent new modules from breaking
existing scripts.
It does, however, permit those scripts to be repaired by the
simple change of locking the script to the acceptable version(s)
of the module.
This is often I<significantly> easier than updating the script,
and avoids the possibility of introducing new bugs either due
to modifications of the script or from bugs in the newer module.

=head3 Test Systems Need Test Modules

In mission-critical environments, production versions of
scripts could always be released to a version range of a 
module, reflecting the ranges of the module it had been tested
and known to work against:

    use foo 2.0-2.1;	# Accept any 2.0 or 2.1 version

When a new version of C<foo.pm> needs to be rolled out with the
new version of the script, the version of C<foo.pm> could be
set to 2.2 and the new script released with

    use foo =2.2;	# Accept any 2.2 version

Now new and old versions of script and module can be released
with no impact on existing production software.  When it is
decided that the new versions should become the standard
versions, the new script is copied over the old and the modules
are not touched.

=head2 Possible Optimization - Indexes

A possible problem introduced with this proposal is an even
greater increase in the amount of searching of directories
that must be done.  This is an often-expensive process, and
can have a serious impact when even small scripts are run tens
of thousands of times per day (as ours do).

This could be resolved by adding some sort of simple index
files to the installation tree.  The index files could simply
be a list of all the files (pathnames) found under this particular
branch of the file tree.  Since those pathnames would contain
the version numbers, examining any index file would be sufficient
for determining what versions lay where.  If later uses of
C<use lib> chose a subset of that tree, the index data would
already be present.  In an ideal situation, only one or two
index files might be all that is needed to find all versions
of all modules.

More complex indexes could be built which might include all the
dependency information in a manner not dissimilar to the output
of C<lorder(1)>.

Reliability would best be done by implementing index construction
as an automatic part of module install.  As above, this could
be automated such that neither the module developer nor the
system administrator would have to worry about it; the process
would still be:

    perl6 Makefile.PM
    make
    make install

and the C<make install> updates the indexes.  At that point it
is not clear to mean that such an index is required; in its
absence C<perl6> should simply search the C<@INC> directories
as it does now.

=head2 Adaptation to Perl5

There is nothing in this proposal which could not be implemented
in perl5.X, and it would probably be a Good Thing if such were done.

=head2 Alternative Idea - Module Versioning In Namespaces

Some languages allow multiple versions of a module to be loaded
simultaneously.  It is my opinion that In This Way Lies Madness, but
C<perl> has done stranger things.  Should we decide to allow this,
incorporating the version number into the namespace would allow the
appropriate disambiguation.

Let us suppose that module C<foo> requires module C<bar v1.0>,
while module C<baz> requires module C<bar 2.0>.  Also assume
that both versions of C<bar> provide a C<op> function.  Then
these two modules could do

    module foo.pm			module baz.pm

    use bar =1.0.;			use bar =2.0. ;
    # Uses bar1.0::op                   # Uses bar2.0::op
    bar::op();                          bar::op();

and each time get the appropriate invocation of C<op>.

Similarly modules C<foo> and C<baz> both create a C<bar> object,
the object should blessed into the appropriate version of C<baz>,
so that

    my $handle1 = new foo ;
    my $handle2 = new bar ;
    my $var1 = $handle1->op();	# Always gets op 1.0
    my $var2 = $handle2->op();	# Always gets op 2.0

always invokes the appropriate version of C<$op>.

While I'm not seriously suggesting this dual loading be allowed, it should
at least be considered by the folks who know more about objects than
I do.  Note, though, that this kind of feature might prove to be invaluable
in testing new versions of modules.  With appropriate aliasing added,
a test script could do

    use foo <3.0 as foo_old;
    use foo =3.0. as new_foo;

    # do something with foo_old
    # do identical things with foo_new
    # compare results

Again, I'm not seriously suggesting this feature.  But if it comes
up, all the module versioning rules above need to be revisited.

=head1 REFERENCES

    lorder(1) - Optimising .o file orders for UNIX loader ld(1)
