=head1 TITLE

context-based method overloading

=head1 VERSION

  Maintainer: David Nicol <perl6rfc@davidnicol.com>
  Date: 15 Aug 2000
  Last Modified: 29 Sep 2000
  Mailing List: perl6-language-subs@perl.org
  Number: 98
  Version: 3
  Status: Frozen

=head1 freeze notes

the suggested coercion system is admitedly ad hoc.

=head1 ABSTRACT

Another to overload a named function is
by return type.  This document is a companion piece to
a similarly named one about protoypes. 


=head1 DESCRIPTION

Defining multiple subroutines with both the same name and the same calling
interface that explicitly return items of differing types is now
allowed.

=head2 methods are subroutines

I use the words "method" and "subroutine" interchangably in this document.
I do this because I find "subroutine" to invoke an aura of drawing flow charts and explicit program counter incrementation.  "subroutine" means, "a routine
which is part of a larger routine" and focuses on the implementation. "Method"
on the other hand means "a way of doing" and is a word more at home with
the OO abstractions which this RFC promotes.

=head2 what constitutes a context?

We are familiar with "scalar context" and "array context" from perl5 and
previous.  Perl6 gives us user-defined contexts as well as user defined
types or all sorts.  Any unique string or "compiled interface object,"
should such exist,  can be a context, for the purposes
of context-based method overloading.


=head2 interaction with prototype-based and traditional overloading


A traditional perlsub may be considered the simultaneous
definition of two routines
C<$ sub(PROTO){body}> and
C<@ sub(PROTO){body}>.

It is now possible to differentiate between these two explicitly, as
well as accessing the (now extended?) C<want> methods within a generic method.

=head2 guaranteed sane values

The return context is considered before considering the types of the
arguments, and in the case of no exact match, the fallback is to a
default method defined to work in the given context rather than to
the default method for the name, should one exist.

This provides a guarantee to a typed variable that it will not be
loaded with a value that does not make sense to it.  Untyped variables
are not affected.

=head2 implicit contexts

Assignment where the Lvalue is typed implies a context, which
may change dynamicly as typed objects move around as scalars.

=head2 acceptable coercions

When resolving which method C<foo()> to call in a context CTXT, and there
is no method  C<foo()> defined for the context CTXT, Perl will examine
the types listed in C<@CTXT::ISA{OVERLOAD_CONTEXTS}> for a list
of other contexts
to see if C<foo()> can produce, before throwing an error.  This search
is NOT recursive, unless defined so by the tying of the array to a
dynamic iterator.

=head2 ambiguity resolution

In situations where multiple interpretations are possible, such
as the f(g()) situation, the first possible method that will work
is called.

The search order is based on the preferences of the outer function,
then the preferences of the inner function.

Functions maintain their preference order in an array

	@PACKNAME::methodname{OVERLOAD_PREFERENCES}

and the first context specifier found in that array, which can be
satisifed with a call to the named method, is used.

If no such array exists,

	@PACKNAME::OVERLOAD_PREFERENCES 

is consulted.

Perl6 maintains a global @CORE::OVERLOAD_PREFERENCES which begins
with C<qw(ARRAY SCALAR)> and has all types declared in the program
appended to it as they appear, which is used when neither a method 
nor its class does not
provide its own OVERLOAD_PREFERENCES array.

=head2 specification incomplete

Further points to discuss and agree on include the relation of this
mechanism to inheritance, and multiple inheritance, and the meta-alteration
of all aspects of the mechanism.





=head1 IMPLEMENTATION

At compile time, the keys in the big hash (be it global or per-package
or per-class) that holds the mapping from the names of the classes
to their coderefs are further extended to include, 
as well as the prototype,
the declared type of the return values, when specified,
as part of the
name of each method. 

Method names store their own rules, if any, for resolving which
method of the set with that name are to be called in a dispatch
situation, in a specially prototyped method. 

=head1 REFERENCES

RFC 21: Subroutines: Replace C<wantarray> with a generic C<want> function

RFC 57: Subroutine prototypes and parameters

RFC 61: Interfaces for linking C objects into perlsubs

RFC 75: structures and interface definitions

