=head1 The Perl 6 Summary for the week ending 20021020

I'm sorry to have to inform you that I've returned from my holiday
(no, base jumping and paragliding were I<not> involved) and that this
week's summary will not be written by the estimable Leon
Brocard. Sorry about that. Leon is currently taking a rest cure.

So, with the customary mention of Mister Brocard out of the way good
and early this week, it's time to take a look at what's been discussed
on the internals list:

=head2 Regarding JVM - Parrot Compatibility

Newcomer Karthik Kumar is interested in writing a tool to convert java
C<.class> files to parrot C<.pbc> files and asked for information on
what had been done in this area. Leon Brocard says it's very easy to
get the basics working because of the low number of JVM bytecodes. But
getting the fundamentals (classes, objects) right is hard. Ramesh
Ananthakrishnan commented that it might be a little early for anything
more than proofs of concept at the moment as Parrot is a rapidly
moving target. Ramesh also came up with the idea of compiling `real
machine' assembly language to `virtual machine' parrot assembler.

Karthik commented that the real issue seems to be one of what level of
support Parrot will offer for objects, and until that is known the
class->parrot problem is almost pointless to solve.

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20021014103743.83432.qmail%40web13204.mail.yahoo.com>

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20021015083634.61117.qmail%40web40503.mail.yahoo.com> -- Ramesh
clarifies his `Linux in Parrot' idea. 

=head2 The Getting Started Guide

Erik Lechak is still not loving POD but, despite his distaste he
posted version 0.4 of his getting started guide in POD format. Thanks
a lot Erik. Marty Pauley suggested that Erik take a look at the Simple
Document Format which may meet his needs better than POD

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20021017182228.GO3764%40soto.kasei.com>

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=3DB1B188.2000508%40the-small-print.com>

=head2 C# and Parrot

Rhys Weatherly, author of Portable.NET, part of the DotGNU project
made a welcome appearance on the list. Apparently the DotGNU people
are looking into compiling C# down to parrot bytecode and hoped that
there might be parrot people who were interested in trying to complete
their compiler and system library. 

Rhys wanted to know how to make a user-defined class in Parrot; what
the convention is for which registers must be saved across a call;
the size of C<int> and whether there was a way to store and access
auxiliary data in a Parrot bytecode file. 

Answers were provided. Sadly, the answer to Rhys's question about
user-defined classes was "You don't, yet." Other answers were more
immediately useful.

The DotGNU weekly IRC meeting discussed Parrot this week, Leon and Dan
managed to cover both sessions between them, and there's a log
available.

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=3DAF74B6.1B9A6B1%40zip.com.au>

L<http://dotgnu.info/pipermail/developers/2002-October/008380.html> --
Condensed summary of the meeting

L<http://ajmitch.dhis.org/dotgnu/> -- unedited logs available here

=head2 Variable/Value Split Prelims

Leopold Toetsch rather confused me when he replied to a two week old
message (I thought I'd completely screwed up setting the `limit by
date' values in my summary buffer) about the conceptual split between
variables and values. Leo wanted some clarification which Dan
provided. 

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=a05111b07b9c6cdf2da21%40%5B63.120.19.221%5D> -- Dan's old message

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=200210180849.g9I8ngI11385%40thu8.leo.home> -- Leo's questions

=head2 PMC Initializers

Leon Brocard attempted to kick start discussion of Jonathan Sillito's
patch to pass more information when creating new PMCs. Leopold Toetsch
and Josef HE<ouml>E<ouml>k both said they thought that something along
those lines was a good idea, but the discussion seemed to die
there. Later in the week, Dan introduced the new C<init_pmc> function
to PDD02, which works along the lines suggested.

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=a05111b06b9d5e367ade6%40%5B63.120.19.221%5D>

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20021014191656.GA13787%40ns0>

=head2 PerlHash questions

Clinton A. Pierce wondered about how to do the equivalent of C<exists
$hash{$key}> in Parrot when one doesn't necessarily know the types of
the things in the hash. Leo Toetsch pointed to C<exists_keyed> and
C<type_keyed>. Jason Gloudon pointed out that the docs for
C<type_keyed> referred only to PMCs, with no mention of 'primitive'
types. He wondered if PerlHash shouldn't just dictate that its
contents were all PMCs.

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=5.1.0.14.2.20021019230909.02179648%40www.geeksalad.org>

=head2 Meanwhile in Perl6-language

The language group is trying to catch up with internals in number of
posts. They managed 89 posts this week compared to internals' 96. If
you discount attachments, language probably won on volume (and it
certainly wins hands down on the `difficulty of summarization'
metric).

=head2 Draft Proposal: Declaring Classwide Attributes

The discussion of how to declare classwide attributes rumbled on from
last week; I'll just pick out a few nuggets.

=over 4

=item * C<HASH>, <ARRAY> etc will likely become <Hash>, <Array> etc,
and there's a good chance that C<UNIVERSAL> will become C<Object>

=item * Implicit invocants can participate in multiple dispatch

=item * It's worth taking a look at Smalltalk metaclasses, or Ruby's
classes. I<Putting Metaclasses to To Work> might also be worth a read

=back

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=9B4F541C-D7F2-11D6-8390-00050245244A%40cognitivity.com> -- Thread
starts here

L<http://www.aw.com/catalog/academic/product/1,4096,0201433052,00.html>
-- the Metaclasses book

=head2 Perl6 Operator Precedence Table

The `Operator Precedence' thread kept on rolling from last week. The
current game appears to be `working out how to free C<&> and C<|> to
become superposition constructors', which means hanging the bitwise
operators somewhere else. Various ideas have been proposed, but people
really didn't like C<|||> and C<&&&>. The current front runners appear
to be:

=over 4

=item * C<$a b& $b>

=item * C<$a .& $b>

=item * 

    my @a is bitmap($a);
    my @b is bitmap($b);
    my @c is bitmap($c); 

    @a = @b ^|| @c; # Correcting what I assume is Larry's typo

=back

It looks like this whole area is still somewhat fluid though.

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=Pine.LNX.4.44.0210170843110.11057-100000%40london.wall.org> 

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=Pine.LNX.4.44.0210171406430.13330-100000%40london.wall.org>

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=Pine.LNX.4.44.0210171436350.13850-100000%40london.wall.org>

=head2 C<untaintby> property

Miko O'Sullivan proposed an C<untaintby> property which `restricts
which modules may untaint the data or data derived from that data.'
The feedback wasn't that positive, but Larry came up with the idea of
callbacks on properties which look rather cool. (`too cool!' according
to Miko).

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=232810-220021011414941899%40M2W063.mail2web.com>

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=Pine.LNX.4.44.0210141007390.20533-100000%40london.wall.org>

=head2 Indeterminate Maths

Michael Schwern opened a can of worms when he wondered if C<1/0> would
throw an error or just return a value representing an indeterminate
result. Leon wondered if it'd be possible to, for instance have a
module which did all its arithmetic in, say, integers module prime
P. Dan thought yes, with lots of overloading. Adam Lopresto thought
C<1/0> would be a good place for the new C<fail> semantics. We ended
up in a debate about the mathematical values of C<$n/0> (apparently
x/0 is indeterminate when x is zero and undefined otherwise).

This thread also saw discussion of: the nature of Object Orientation
and the benefits of instance based inheritance; the
semantics of NaN. (Did you know that C<NaN != NaN>; the use of
exceptions; proofs that 1/0 is, necessarily, undefined; Lukasiewiczian
logic (SQL type NULLs); Miko's `inner Larry Wall'; and the hypothetical
C<Math::Perverse> module, which sounds like a candidate for the Acme
namespace to me.

Larry seems to think that a combination of pragmas and overloaded
classes should be enough to do the job.

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20021014210513.GM4719%40ool-18b93024.dyn.optonline.net>

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=168270-220021021505816688%40M2W053.mail2web.com> -- complete with
citation of www.userfriendly.org

=head2 A concept for Exceptions

Miko O'Sullivan has been doing some serious thinking. After wowing us
with his C<untaintby> proposal, he came up with some proposals for
exceptions which would allow for all sorts of cunning tricks. Dan
pointed out that at least one of the cunning tricks wasn't actually
possible, but that you could get something like it by throwing
continuations with your exceptions.

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=410-2200210215183328386%40M2W045.mail2web.com>

=head1 In brief

The effort to fix the JIT core when compiled with optimizations on x86
boxes continues (with a certain amount of discussion of how to use the
test modules). 

Simon Glover sent a covey of patches, mostly adding tests (yay!) along
with one to fix up and document the C<.include> assembler
macro. Applied.

Chromatic did some copy editing of the docs and sent in a patch with
his fixes. Applied.

Leopold Toetsch has a large patch for the GC system which tries to
deal with some of the problems. It's not a complete fix, but Leo
thinks it's a start.

Simon Glover noticed that F<lib/Parrot/PMC.pm> is marked as
autogenerated and therefore removed by a C<make clean>, which would be
okay, but there's no rule in the makefile to regenerate it. Steve Fink
fixed it using Simon's suggested solution.

Dan's fixed the docs for the splice vtable entries in PDD2. Leopold
Toetsch promised to implement it.

Michael Lazzaro offers a summary of variables and assignment at
L<http://cog.cognitivity.com/perl6/var.html>. Thanks Michael.

=head1 Who's Who in Perl 6

=over 4

=item Who are you?

Brent Dax

=item What do you do for/with Perl 6?

I manage Configure changes and occasionally work on embedding and
extending, the regex engine, misc.c, or whatever catches my fancy.

=item Where are you coming from?

The end of a day in high school (or sometimes the middle of the day...)
:^)

Seriously, I think Perl 6 is an excellent idea.  Perl is a great
language, but it's been in need of a de-crufting for some time.

=item When do you think Perl 6 will be released?

Hmm...probably next year sometime.  Not soon enough for me to like it,
but not late enough to complain about it.

=item Why are you doing this?

Because it's fun and interesting.  And I get paid to manage a Web site,
so Perl eq money.  And I'm actually taken seriously.

=item You have 5 words. Describe yourself.

Hubristic hacker who really knows_little.

=item Do you have anything to declare?

No, of course not.  No need to search this suitcase.  Nope, not a bit.
The customs dogs must have smelled a doggy treat or something.

=back

=head1 Acknowledgements

Thanks are, of course, due to Leon Brocard for ably filling my shoes
for the past couple of weeks and making sure that the summaries got
through.

I'd also like to thank Rhys Weatherly and Gopal V for popping up on
the internals list. I think it's I<great> to see good communication
and cooperation between the different projects working in this field.

Thanks too to my army of crack proofreaders who help to turn the
misspelled morass of bad grammar that is my first draft into something
that's readable. This week's team was: Chris Ball

The Perl 6 Summary was produced with the aid of GNER tea, the
distractions of MAME and I<10 Yard Fight> and with money from O'Reilly
and Associates. If you liked it, please consider giving money to the
Perl Foundation at L<http://donate.perl-foundation.org> and feedback
and/or NeXTcubes to me, L<mailto:pdcawley@bofh.org.uk>. 

The fee paid for publication of this summary on perl.com has been
donated directly to the Perl Foundation.
