=head1 Simple DirectMedia Library Bindings for Perl

Welcome to the new SDL Perl pages, graciously hosted by Perl.org.

=head2 Latest News

B<22 August 2009> SDL_Perl is at v2.2.1

The master branch is stable at v2.2.1. This only Builds on Linux and Darwin platforms.
Work is being done on v2.2.1 to add more features and fix more bugs. This will be made available on CPAN as soon as possible.

This version provides a lot of critical bugfixes from the previous release on cpan. Read the CHANGELOG. 

The bleeding edge code is available from L<http://github.com/kthakore/SDL_Perl/>. The experimental branch is where the v2.2.2 will be developed.

Also the L<https://rt.cpan.org/Dist/Display.html?Queue=SDL_perl> is active again. We are cleaning up bugs and responding to reporters.
See L<http://search.cpan.org/~dgoehrig/SDL_Perl-2.2.0/lib/SDL.pm>.  Please report any strange behavior to the bug tracker. 


=head2 Tutorials Online!

We've written four tutorials so far, and you can read them online:

=over 4

=item SDL::Tutorial at L<http://sdl.perl.org/tutorials/>

An introduction to SDL Perl.

=item SDL::Tutorial::Drawing at L<http://sdl.perl.org/tutorials/drawing.html>

Drawing basics.

=item SDL::Tutorial::Animation at L<http://sdl.perl.org/tutorials/animation.html>

Animation basics.

=item SDL::Tutorial::Images at L<http://sdl.perl.org/tutorials/images.html>

Image loading and animation.

=back

Of course, if you grab a snapshot and install it, not only can you report
successes (and probably a few bugs), but you can play with the demo program for
each tutorial!  It's very fun.

=head2 Articles

Developing games with Perl and SDL on Ars Technica written by Andy Bakun
L<http://arstechnica.com/gaming/news/2006/02/games-perl.ars>

=head2 A Little History

Why are these pages new?  In October, David GE<ouml>hrig, the creator and
maintainer of SDL Perl, announced that he was quitting his job, selling all his
stuff, and going backpacking in Europe for a few months.  That left SDL Perl
without a maintainer or a home. But SDL Perl is back and running with Kartik and 
David's help.

=head2 Future Plans

We're working on polishing the latest code available to make the v2.2.2
release. One of our goals after a working build is to have a Parrot parser 
with Perl 5 NCI to make installing even simpler.

Here is the roadmap so far. 
L<http://wiki.github.com/cthulhuology/SDLPerl>

Hopefully, Perl will soon be a wonderful language in which to write media
applications -- including games.


=head2 Mailing list

Subscribe to the development list by sending an e-mail to C<sdl-devel-subscribe@perl.org>.
Subscribe to the source code changes list by sending an e-mail to C<sdl-changes-subscribe@perl.org>.

We'll be making archives of the old mailing list available.

=head2 IRC

The IRC channel used by the SDL Perl people is #sdl on irc.perl.org.
If you have an IRC client use this link: L<irc://irc.perl.org/%23sdl>
If you don't have an IRC client you can use the Mibbit web based IRC client by clicking
here: L<http://widget.mibbit.com/?server=irc.perl.org&channel=%23sdl>


=head2 Applications


App-Fotagger is an application to add tags to images.
It was the first attempt of Thomas Klausner at SDL and 
it can be improved a lot: L<http://search.cpan.org/dist/App-Fotagger>

=head2 Games

The original Frozen Bubble L<http://www.frozen-bubble.org/> is probably 
the most well known application written in SDL Perl.

Thomas Klausner has started a Space Invaders clone in SDL Perl. 
You can find the code on Github L<http://github.com/domm/Game-PerlInvaders>.

=head2 Related Links

=over 4

=item L<http://www.libsdl.org/>

The SDL Homepage

=item L<http://wiki.github.com/kthakore/SDL_perl/dependencies>

Where to find SDL dependencies

=back
