=pod

=head1 Grants Committee Rules of Operation

=over

=item 1

Grant requests will be evaluated quarterly. A grant request which 
has not been rejected will be valid for two quarters, after which it 
will no longer be considered. The person requesting the grant may 
resubmit the proposal with no changes if he or she wishes, and the 
request will be valid for another two quarters. Grant requests which 
have been explicitly rejected must be rewritten.

=item 1

Grant requests will be evaluated starting February 1, May 1, 
August 1, and November 1, and awarded March 1, June 1, September 1, 
and December 1, respectively. If there are no funds available to 
award any grants, then the quarter will still count as one of the 
quarters for grant expiration.

=item 1

Each grantee will have a Grant Manager appointed to them to keep 
tabs on what is going on with the grant. Managers should report at 
least quarterly on progress, and present the grantees final report 
when they are done. Managers do not have to be voting members of the 
grant committee.

=item 1

Any vote of the grants committee must have at least 2/3 of the 
members voting.

=item 1

Grant votes require a majority of the cast votes to be in favor of 
the proposal being voted on.

=item 1

Non-travel grants may not be awarded to any member of the grants
committee

=item 1

Travel grants may only be awarded to members of the grants 
committee for actual expenses, and only with the full approval of 
TPF's board of directors.

=item 1

Structural changes -- adding or removing members, adding or 
removing rules, or changing the chairmanship of the committee -- 
require 2/3 of the grant committee members to vote in favor of the 
change. Additionally rules changes must be approved by TPF's board.

=item 1

The committee will, once each calendar year, produce a public 
report of all grants issued and their current status.

=back

=cut
