=head1 The Perl 6 Summary for the fortnight ending 2004-06-06

Whee! There's a new graphics card in the G5, which means I can type this
at the big screen again, which makes me happy. Well, it would make me
far happier if the new card didn't leave horrible artifacts all over
the screen like some kind of incontinent puppy attempting to fulfil
OpenGL draw instructions. Maybe next week will see a third card in the
box.

Dang! It looks like the G5 will be off receiving some TLC from an Apple
service centre while I'm on holiday next week. Which means that the
'weekly' summaries will continue on their fortnightly summer holiday
schedule for at least one more summary. But then the lists themselves
appear to be on summer footing anyway.

Ahem. 

As you will probably have worked out by now, we start with
perl6-internals. 

=head2 Library loading

Jens Rieks is working on library loading code that does all the nice
things we've come to expect from other languages. The plan being that
you'll be able to write (say)

    use('some_library')

and Parrot will go off and search it's include paths for
F<some_library.(pbc|imc|pasm|whatever)> and load it. As he noted, if
you're going to implement that kind of code in parrot assembler (or
PIR, or whatever), you need some way of loading the loading code. It's
also a good idea to have a working C<stat>. Jens added a
C<Parrot_load_bytecode_direct> function to the parrot core to support
the first part. His please for a functional (if not complete) C<stat>
were answered by Dan who set about implementing the C<stat> API he
outlined a few weeks ago.

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=200405211333.22233.parrot@jensbeimsurfen.de>

=head2 Embedding Parrot

Leo Tötsch and chromatic answered Paul Querna's questions from last
week about embedding Parrot. 

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=200405241043.i4OAh7a01618@thu8.leo.home>

=head2 Using PMCs as PerlHash keys

TOGoS wanted to know how he could use a PMC as a key in a
PerlHash. Leo replied that it was as simple as doing

    $P2 = new Key
    $P2 = "key_string"
    $P0 = $P1[$P2]

Piers Cawley did some naive translation into PASM and got himself
horribly confused. Leo and TOGoS corrected him.


L<http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=20040520190352.46387.qmail@web41410.mail.yahoo.com>

=head2 First draft of IO and event design

Remarking that events and IO are "(kinda, sorta)" the same thing, Dan
posted his first draft of a unified IO and events design and asked for
comments. This being p6i, he got several (though not as many as usual,
maybe everyone likes it).

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=a0611040abcd7faf9492e@[10.0.1.3]>

=head2 Freeze, objects, crash, boom

Will Coleda tried to get freezing and objects to play well together and
failed. So he asked a bunch of questions. Leo didn't solve the problem,
but he did have some pointers to where it was coming from. 

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=40B4D76B.5060306@coleda.com>

=head2 MMD table setup semantics

Possibly winning an award for the oldest rejuvenated thread, Nicholas
Clark had some questions about a post Dan made about MMD at the end of
April. He made a suggesting about how to calculate 'distance' for multi
dispatch. Dan pointed out that Larry had decreed that the 'distance'
would be the 'Manhattan Distance'. (Google has several definitions). 

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=20040527143518.GD1129@plum.flirble.org>

=head2 Compiler FAQ entry

Will Coleda posted a possible set of entries for the compiler writers'
FAQ. Leo had a few quibbles. Sterling Hughes suggested that having
small, runnable source code examples would be really helpful. 

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=40B7ECCF.6030205@coleda.com>

=head2 Layering PMCs

Dan kicked off a discussion on how to go about layering PMCs. The usual
suspects offered suggestions. The aim is to be able to layer behaviours
on top of PMCs without massive overhead or combinatorial explosion
problems. As usual with these things, there's several possible ways of
doing it, the debate is about choosing the best one.

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=a06110404bcde7bf18ebd@[172.24.18.98]>

=head2 IO Layers 

Leo had some questions about the (not fully implemented)
ParrotIOLayerAPI. He laid out a proposal for implementing
things. Uri Guttman and Dan joined in a discussion of the
issues. (Simple summary of the issues: Asynchronous IO is
hard. Possibly more accurate summary of the issues: Asynchronous IO
is *not* synchronous)


L<http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=40B71F53.8000001@toetsch.at>

=head2 C<PIO_unix_pipe()>

Leo's implemented a C<PIO_unix_pipe()> method which allows you to run an
external program and capture the results with a Parrot IO handle. He
doctored the C<open> opcode to use it

    pipe = open "/bin/ls -l", "-|" 

Dan liked it, but proposed also adding a C<backtick> operator.

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=40C1C64D.5080105@toetsch.at>

=head2 Register spilling

Dan noted that it's possible to get the register allocator caught up in
an infinite loop (or as near infinite as makes no difference) as it
tries to work out a register spilling strategy. He proposed there be a
'slow but working' fallback method to use if the normal method goes
through too many iterations. Leo suggested an delightfully brute force
approach with some possible elaborations that Dan didn't think would be
that useful in the cases he was seeing.

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=rt-3.0.9-29837-88076.5.39698439413385@perl.org>

=head2 Stat

Dan implemented a simple C<stat> function that should be enough for
Jens Rieks to get a library path based loading system to work. Leo
patched his first attempt and most things in the garden were lovely
(with a couple of rather less pretty spots that are being worked on as
I type).

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=a06110401bcd836c94dd7@[172.24.18.98]>

=head2 Bit ops on strings

Argh! The character encoding discussion! Run away!

Nicholas Clark and Dan discussed Parrots Unicode handling.

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=20040525113008.GC1129@plum.flirble.org>

=head2 Standard Library behaviour

Dan commented that now Jens was working the architecture of the
standard library, the time had come to discuss how things should
work. He outlined the options, asked for comments, and got promptly
Warnocked. 

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=a06110407bcd924533939@[10.0.1.3]>

=head1 Meanwhile, in perl6-language

=head2 The Periodic Table of the Operators

Mark Lentczner announced that he'd put together a periodic table of
Perl 6 operators. Everyone liked it, though several amendments were
proposed and made. Check it out, it's very lovely (and anyone who
references the great Edward Tufte in his explanation of the design is
likely to be all right in my book). 

There will be T-shirts.

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=486B658A-AF64-11D8-8F60-000393A56BB6@glyphic.com>

L<http://www.ozonehouse.com/mark/blog/code/PeriodicTable.html>

=head2 Announcements, Apologies, Acknowledgements

Ah well, if you can't beat the system, roll with it and pretend it's
deliberate. Next week's summary definitely won't be next week, but there will
be another fortnightly summary covering the fortnight ending
2004-06-20. And the next summary will almost certainly be on a
fortnightly schedule too, unless BT work some miracle and sort out my
ADSL transfer promptly.

If you find these summaries useful or enjoyable, please consider
contributing to the Perl Foundation to help support the development of
Perl. You might also like to send me feedback at
L<mailto:pdcawley@bofh.org.uk>

L<http://donate.perl-foundation.org/> -- The Perl Foundation

L<http://dev.perl.org/perl6/> -- Perl 6 Development site
