=head1 The Perl 6 Summary for the six days ending 2004-07-31

As I threatened last week, I'm moving the rollover point for these
summaries from midnight on Sunday/Monday to midnight on
Friday/Saturday, but rather than do it in one swell foop I'm doing a
couple of six day weeks. The theory is that, once I become a student
teacher I'll be rather busy during the week, but I should still be able
to make time to write the summaries at the weekend. 

That's the theory at least. You'll note that this didn't get posted to
the mailing lists on a Sunday. Blame my cousin for getting married. It
won't happen again.

=head2 Pie-thon

Good news! Guido is a gentleman and declined to throw a pie at Dan.

Bad news! The Perl Community is a bunch of savages, and they paid $520
to be able to throw pie at Dan.

Good news! There are photos.

L<http://www.sidhe.org/~dan/blog/archives/000372.html>

L<http://www.oreillynet.com/pub/a/oscon2004/friday/>

=head2 Notes to self

=over

=item 1

American's pronounce 'maths' as 'math'. 

=item 2

Don't make silly cracks about American rectitude

=item 3

Oops.

=back

=head2 Leo's proposed calling conventions

It's been apparent for a while now that Leo Tötsch isn't happy with
Parrot's current calling conventions. This week he posted a proof of
concept patch implementing a proposed new scheme. Luke Palmer agreed
that it was probably worth consideration. We'll see what Dan has to say
when he gets back from OSCON.

M<41063ACB.2040208@toetsch.at>

=head2 Stack based language

RaghavendraK asked about the difference between stack and register
based virtual machines. Brent Royal-Gordon gave good advice.

M<13d2515bd8.15bd813d25@huawei.com>

=head2 ICU outdated

Joshua Gatcomb noted that the ICU that comes with Parrot is, not to put
too fine a point on it, old and buggy. The ICU developers have
suggested that Parrot move to version 3.0. Josh proposed various ways
of doing this. Leo wants ICU out of the Parrot CVS, but Dan's argued in
the past that it should be in there because he doesn't want to force
people to chase round fetching a raft of required libraries before they
can build parrot. 

M<20040730183121.54027.qmail@web60804.mail.yahoo.com>

=head2 Jarkko proposed for a CVS checkin rights

Following a raft of high quality patches from Jarkko Hietaniemi, Leo
proposed him for membership of the C<cvs ci> club.

M<410BE8B4.7030103@toetsch.at>

=head1 Meanwhile, in perl6-language

=head2 What's core?

Larry and Dan Hursh discussed what would be going in the standard Perl
6 distribution. Dan argued that we should be concentrating on producing
a distribution akin to the current Perl 5 distribution, but with a few
fewer kitchen sinks. Larry argued that we should concentrate on two
distributions: 

=over

=item 1

Bare bones, just able to build itself and with enough capability to
bootstrap everything else.

=item 2

Extended. The barebones system + a set of libraries fetchable from
CP6AN that constitute the Perl 6 'supported' library; modules that are
maintained by the Perl 6 equivalent of perl5-porters and which will be
supported over a long time frame.

=back

I don't think Dan's been convinced yet. Elsewhere in the thread Luke
Palmer coined the delightful acronym 'EYEWTIBWATA' -- Everything You
Ever Wanted To Install But Were Afraid To Ask -- or
eye-witty-bwattle. I'm unsure about whether it's going to rank up there
with Tim-toe-tidy though.

M<20040725063231.33578.qmail@onion.perl.org>

=head1 Announcements, Apologies, Acknowledgements

I'm getting bored of typing 'Palmer' and 'Tötsch' once a week, so I'm
considering treating Luke and Leo like Larry, Dan, Damian and, if you
insist, chromatic.

So, if you find these summaries useful or enjoyable, please
consider contributing to the Perl Foundation to help support the
development of Perl. You might also like to send feedback or
contributions to a 'getting Piers to OSCON 2005' fund to
L<mailto:pdcawley@bofh.org.uk>

L<http://donate.perl-foundation.org/> -- The Perl Foundation

L<http://dev.perl.org/perl6/> -- Perl 6 Development site