=head1 The Perl 6 Summary for the week ending 20040201

Welcome once again to Gateshead, where the skies are grey, the view is
uninspiring, and the workmen across the road seem determined to fall
off the ladder before they get the double glazing fitted.

But enough of the gay Gateshead life, let's hurry on to the doings of
the denizens of the perl6-internals mailing list. Who knows, we might
even visit the inmates of perl6-language later.

=head2 Threading

To nobody's great surprise, we talked about threading. In particular,
Gordon Henriksen's concerns about the all around scariness of
C<morph> (and not just in a threading context). I'm not sure I quite
understand what's being done, but progress is definitely being made. 

Late in the week Dan announced that there were obviously still
issues to be worked out before we started in on implementation (modulo
some 'obvious' stuff). He also asked for 'real worldish' tests for
threading in order to get some real numbers for different possible
approaches and to see if the problem is as bad as it was first
thought.

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=a06010205bc3e9930bcac@[192.168.1.28]>

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=5.1.1.6.2.20040128122120.09f96948@pop.mindspring.com>

=head2 Embedding vs. extending interface types

Remember last week's kerfuffle about C<Parrot_Interp> vs
C<Parrot_INTERP>? Dan's resolved it be deciding that we'll just call
it C<Parrot_Interp> everywhere. Gordon Henriksen sent in the patch.

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=a06010208bc3e9e36ea11@[192.168.1.28]>

=head2 Leo explains 

Will Coleda (and others) have been having problems with data that
should be inviolate getting clobbered in strange ways. After some
effort, Will got his offending code down to 22 lines. This let Leo
TE<ouml>tsch work out what was going on, and in the referenced post he
explained all. Essentially, the Copy on Write logic for handling
register (and other) stacks is broken. The workaround is not to use
Continuations and Exception Handlers. Fixes are welcome. Please.

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=40177A46.6060308@toetsch.at>

=head2 Testing Signal Handlers

Leo asked for help with sorting out the testing code for some
signal handling tests that seemed to be confusing the harness quite
badly. Uri Guttman came up with some suggested workarounds, as did
Mike Schwern. Leo found a third way. (If you've ever tried to write
test with C<fork> in it, it's worth taking a look at both Uri and
Schwern's answers.

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=401639A9.8030107@toetsch.at>

=head2 The costs of sharing revisited

Last week, Leo posted some scary numbers implying that using a shared
PMC led to terrible slowdowns. This week he posted the latest numbers,
and things are looking up. 

   $ time perl-58-th shared_ref.pl

   real 0m8.694s

   $ time parrot shared_ref.pasm

   real 0m0.375

(and that's an unoptimized Parrot). Elizabeth Mattijsen was moved to
ask for a ponie.

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=40178375.8080103@toetsch.at>

=head2 Cunning stunts with with UnManagedStruct

Donning his devious head, Leo demonstrated the use of UnManagedStruct
to allow for unlimited self-inspection and self-modification of Parrot
state. Which isn't really something we want to be possible. In the
opinion of Luke Palmer and Jeff Clites, the costs of removing this
capability aren't worth paying. As Jeff Clites pointed out, you only
use UnManagedStructs when you're calling out to a native library, and
once you introduce a native library all bets are already off.

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=401683E8.8000505@toetsch.at>

=head2 Michael Scott: hero of the week

Over the past few weeks Michael Scott has gradually been making the
parrot distribution a kinder, gentler place with his sterling efforts
to tidy up and generally improve the existing documentation. This week
he rationalized/added documentation for everything in F<src/> (with the
exception of F<malloc.c> and F<malloc-trace.c>). He's working on
documenting F<examples/> now.

The response to his announcement was overwhelmingly and understandably
positive (The consensus is that Mike rocks). Now if we can just
I<keep> everything in such good condition...

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=DDED1473-5287-11D8-8781-000A95C50226@mac.com>

=head2 Parrot DBDI announced

Tim "Perl DBI" Bunce announced the Parrot DBDI Project: A Database
Driver Interface for Parrot. The goal is to have a common Parrot level
interface to database drivers which can then be reused by different
language specific database interfaces. For further details read the
post; it's jolly good. And bravo Tim.

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=20040127225639.GF38394@dansat.data-plan.com>

=head2 Internal exception handlers

Leo posted a set of macros for doing exception handling in the parrot
core using C<TRY/CATCH/THROW> etc. and asked for comments. So far he's
been Warnocked.

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=4018D0CD.4080106@toetsch.at>

=head2 SDL bindings

After Leo fixed the struct PMCs for him, chromatic has proceeded apace
to implement SDL wrappers in Parrot. He's reached the point where he
has code that can create an SDL window and blit a blue rectangle onto
it. Leo applied his patches. Check out
F<examples/pni/sdl_blue_rectangle.imc> if you're interested.

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=1075537672.12245.178.camel@localhost>

=head1 Meanwhile, in perl6-language

Discussions continued to test the encode setups of the participants'
mail readers...

=head2 Semantics of vector operations

A sub-thread of the discussion of the semantics of vector operations
turned into a discussion of the meaning of 'vector' which has
different meanings depending on whether you're a mathematician or
Seymour Cray. 

Another sub-thread discussed the possible ASCII alternatives for C<«>
and C<»>. I'm afraid I'm going to bottle out of attempting to
summarize the various alternatives suggested, if only because I used
up all my POD escape-fu last week. It looks like the C<E<lt>E<lt>> and
C<E<gt>E<gt>> alternatives might be about to bite the dust in favour
of an as yet undecided, less ambiguous, new scheme. Larry hasn't ruled
on it yet though.

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=401720E1.2030009@conway.org>

=head1 Acknowledgements, Apologies, Announcements

I'd just like to announce that, if you haven't seen Eliza Carthy
perform life, you owe it to yourself to rectify that. We went to see
her last night and it's bucked me up enormously. 

If you find these summaries useful or enjoyable, please consider
contributing to the Perl Foundation to help support the development of
Perl. You might also like to send me feedback at
L<p6summarizer@bofh.org.uk>, or drop by my website.

L<http://donate.perl-foundation.org/> -- The Perl Foundation

L<http://dev.perl.org/perl6/> -- Perl 6 Development site

L<http://www.bofh.org.uk/> -- My website, "Just a Summary"


