=head1 Contribtor License Agreement FAQ

B<Q:> Why has TPF adopted a CLA process?

B<A:> We all know that code needs to be documented with a certain amount of
care and accuracy.  Good documentation benefits both programmers and users.
The legal relationships between contributors, users, and TPF need to be
documented for similar reasons:  long-term project stability, meeting the needs
of open source users for adequate and effective legal documentation, and
reducing the risk of disruptive legal disputes and intellectual property
claims.

Also, in the years since the first release of Perl software, open source as a
means for distributing and developing technology has grown and changed.  There
are many more people and organizations involved, as users and as contributors.
The success of the open source model has exposed leading open source programs
and organizations to potential threats from organizations opposed to the
increasing influence of this way of making and distributing code.

The global open source community is recognizing that using intellectual
property and licensing tools to protect and preserve the openness of open
source is essential.  Licenses and other legal tools, like copyrights and
trademarks, which were used to build closed proprietary technologies, are now
being re-purposed to keep open source code freely available.


B<Q:> Do companies who want to contribute material created by their employees
need to use a special CLA form?

B<A:> No.  However, in addition to signing the CLA on its own behalf, a
contributing company (or other organization) should have each contributing
employee sign a CLA, in case an employee's contribution turns out to be owned by
the contributing employee, rather than the employer.  This could occur if,
under local laws, or due to problems with the company's internal intellectual
property policies, some elements of the contribution  are owned by the
employee. Laws on employer ownership of employees' work product vary from
jurisdiction to jurisdiction.

B<Q:> As an employee, do I need to have my employer sign a CLA for my contribution?

B<A:> No.  However, if your employer does own intellectual property rights in
your work, having your employer sign a CLA is a good way to confirm that you
and your employer share a common understanding of your contribution.  Under the
CLA, the contributor represents that if his or her employer has intellectual
property rights in the contribution, the contributor has cleared those rights
either by having the employer sign a CLA, or getting permission, or a waiver of
the employer's rights, in order to make the contribution.


B<Q:> Do I have to list any, or all, of my prior contributions?  That could be
impossible.

B<A:> You are not required to list any of your prior contributions.  However,
as part of the TPF process for documenting contribution licenses, we may ask
you to list key prior contributions.  You are also free to specify them on the
schedule on your own, if you would like to do so.


B<Q:> Why are patents treated separately from other intellectual property?

B<A:> Patents are treated separately because the legal rules for patents are
significantly different from the rules for other kinds of intellectual
property.  One goal of the patent clause is to reduce the likelihood of patent
infringement claims by terminating the license to use TPF code of anyone who
asserts that TPF code infringes a patent.
