=head1 Perl Contributor License Agreement 1.0

This non-exclusive license is designed to serve the Perl community, including
contributors to projects of the Perl Foundation ("Foundation"), the open source
projects and products the Foundation supports, and the users of these projects
and products.  In order to document the non-exclusive intellectual property
license granted for contributions to the projects, the Foundation obtains a
Contributor License Agreement ("CLA"), signed by each Contributor.  Under the
CLA the contributor retains ownership of each Contribution, and remains free to
use each contribution independently of the Foundation for other purposes.

Please complete and send an original signed CLA to: 

  The Perl Foundation
  7456 SW Baseline Road #220
  Hillsboro, OR 97123
  USA

Please read this agreement carefully before signing it, and keep a copy for
your records.

  Full name: __________________________________________________________

  E-Mail: _____________________________________________________________

  Mailing Address: ____________________________________________________

  _____________________________________________________________________

  _______________________________________  Country:   _________________

1.  Definitions.

The "Work" means an existing body of code or documentation that is part of any
of the projects or products owned or managed by the Foundation.

"Contribution" means any work of authorship, including any modifications or
additions to the Work, that is Submitted by you for inclusion in the Work.
"Submitted" means provided to the project, or its representatives, by any form
of electronic, verbal, or written communication, for instance, posting to
electronic mailing lists, source code control systems, or issue tracking
systems that are used for building, discussing, and improving the Work.  No
communication that is conspicuously marked in writing by you as "Not a
Contribution" will be considered to be a Contribution.

"Users" means recipients of the Work distributed by the Foundation, or
distributed by others in accordance with the Foundation's requirements.

"You" means the individual, or other party, that is making this CLA with the
Foundation.  For parties other than individuals, "you" includes all of the
organizational affiliates of the party signing this CLA.  An "organizational
affiliate" means each party that controls, is controlled by, or under common
control with, the party signing this CLA. 


2.  Acceptance. 	You accept and agree to the terms and conditions of
this CLA for your present and future Contributions, and for your Contributions
made prior to signing this CLA.  Your prior contributions subject to this CLA
include, but are not limited to, the Contributions listed on Schedule 1.


3. Foundation Obligations. 	In return for the license granted under this
CLA, the Foundation will use your Contributions only in ways that are
consistent with the open source nature of the Work. Except for the license
granted under this CLA, you reserve all rights in your Contributions.


4.  License.

4.1  Subject to this CLA, you grant to the Foundation, and to the Users, a
perpetual, worldwide, non-exclusive, free-of-charge, royalty-free, irrevocable
license under all intellectual property rights (excluding patent and trademark,
but including copyright) to reproduce, prepare derivative works of, publicly
display, publicly perform, sublicense, and distribute your Contributions, and
derivative works. 

4.2  You also grant to the Foundation, and to the Users, a perpetual,
worldwide, non-exclusive, free-of-charge, royalty-free, irrevocable (except as
specified in this section) patent license to make, have made, use, offer to
sell, sell, import, and otherwise transfer the Contribution. This license
applies only to those patent claims licensable by you that are necessarily
infringed by your Contribution(s) alone, or by the combination of your
Contribution(s) with the Work or with the subsequent contributions of anyone
else.  If any party institutes patent litigation against you or any other party
(including a cross-claim or counterclaim in a lawsuit) alleging that your
Contribution, or the Work to which you have contributed, constitutes direct or
contributory patent infringement, then any patent licenses granted to that
party based on the rights you have granted to the Foundation under this CLA
shall terminate as of the date such litigation is filed.


5.  Representations.

5.1  You represent that you are legally entitled to grant this license. If your
employer(s) has rights to intellectual property created by you which include
your Contributions, you represent that you have received permission to make
Contributions on behalf of that employer, or that your employer has waived such
rights for your Contributions to the Foundation, or that your employer has
signed a separate CLA with the Foundation.  If you have employees, you also
represent that any employee making a Contribution on your behalf is fully
authorized to do so, and that you have sufficient rights in the employee's
Contribution to grant this license.

5.2  You also represent that each of your Contributions is your original
creation, and that to the best of your knowledge, includes complete details of
any third-party license or other restriction, for instance, related patents and
trademarks associated with it.

5.3  If you become aware of any facts or circumstances that would make your
representation under this CLA inaccurate in any respect, you will notify the
Foundation promptly.


6.  Support.	You are not expected to provide support for your Contributions,
unless you want to do so.  Whether or not you charge a fee for support is up to
you.  


7.  Warranty Disclaimer.	To the extent permitted by law, you provide
your Contributions on an "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
KIND, EITHER EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, ANY WARRANTIES
OR CONDITIONS OF TITLE, NON-INFRINGEMENT, MERCHANTABILITY, OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.




Signature: ________________________________ Date: ______________


Schedule 1
Prior Contributions

[ Unless requested by the Foundation, you are not required to complete Schedule 1. ]
