=head1 How TPF Works

I<I often get asked about my role in TPF and how TPF works, in the
sense of "Who's in charge?" So, instead of pointing people to the
legalese in the bylaws and committee charters, this is an explanation
of TPF's structure in plain English. --Allison>

The top level of TPF is the board of directors. It holds the ultimate
authority in the organization, but in practice only exercises veto
power. The board is self-electing, and usually draws its candidates
from the pool of TPF volunteers.

The active members of the board are the president, who oversees the
daily work of TPF, and the treasurer, who acts as a final sanity check
on all expenses.  These positions are elected by the board. Each
president is free to choose their focus for activity: the first
president concentrated on conferences and on incorporating TPF as a
non-profit foundation; the current president concentrates on general
Perl legal issues and on building TPF's relations with companies and
other open source foundations.

The next level is the Steering Committee (SC), which handles the real
work of TPF. The committee is chartered with the full power of the
board, aside from a few financial restrictions (they need board
approval to spend huge gobs of cash or put the foundation into debt).
The SC is a self-electing group of volunteers. The positions on the SC
are loosely defined around areas of work: Grants, Conferences, Awards,
PR, Donor relations, Perl.org and PerlFoundation.org websites, Perl
Mongers, CPAN, etc.

The Grants Committee (GC) reviews grant proposals, allocates grant
funding, and oversees the grants as they're completed. This committee
is self-electing and made up of active Perl developers (with a heavy
concentration of pumpkings), because they have the best sense of what
grants will help Perl.

The Conferences Committee oversees YAPC::NA and offers assistance to
the other YAPC conferences and Perl workshops around the world. This
committee is self-electing and largely made up of organizers from
previous YAPC's.

The majority of TPF's work is done by volunteers, and all it takes to
become a volunteer is to do the job you're volunteering for and talk
to the relevant committee. It's a meritocracy, so we're more concerned
with what people do than with titles, but if you do the work you'll
get the title. Every year each committee reviews the current
positions, some people step down, others volunteer to take their
places, and others trade places. 1-3 years is really about enough for
anyone to stay in one volunteer position, otherwise people tend to
burn out.

This structure may seem strange at first, but it mirrors the way Perl
development has structured itself over the years. At the top, the
community recognizes Larry as the ultimate authority on what Perl
should be, but he rarely exercises that authority. The pumpkings are
the next level; they make the day-to-day decisions on where Perl
should go and make releases. Below that are the people with commit
access to the repositories who filter and apply patches and changes.
And beyond that are the general community contributors who submit
patches and participate in the mailing lists. Anyone can move from
contributor to commit access to pumpking. It's a self-selecting
meritocracy: each pumpking selects their successor, and the group with
commit access chooses who should get commit access. The people who do
the work get invited to step up.
