=head1 This Week on perl5-porters - 17-23 July 2006

I<"I'd like C<perlcc> to die because it's an attractive nuisance.
People keep finding this, finding it doesn't work, and posting "how
can I make this work" posts"> -- Joshua ben Jore, out for blood.

=head1 Topics of Interest

=head2 Is the C<-std=c89> switch worth the pain?

It started when H.Merijn Brand noticed that the recent addition of
the C<gcc> switch (C<-std=c89>, to ensure conformance with the C89
ISO/ANSI standard), caused the Cygwin compiles to develop an
interesting smokey flavour.

  That's not supposed to happen
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00593.html

After he fixed that up, he then noticed that an HP/UX box was also
appeared to be rather distressed by the same switch.  Despite the
fact that the C<gcc> compiler in question was a much more recent
edition.

  Uh oh
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00598.html

Jarkko Hietaniemi felt H.Merijn's pain, and recast the patch to
enable the switch only where it was proven beyond reasonable doubt
not to cause problems. Much the same way that C<-ansi -pedantic>
cannot be used everywhere.

Nicholas Clark thought that it was safe now and should ever more
be so, on FreeBSD. Rafael described some of the creepy-crawly things
he had encountered in his sojourns through C<glibc> headers, and
concluded that Linux should be scratched off the list altogether.
Jarkko fumed and went to stand in the corner.

Sadly, at the end of the day, no more remained, save for a footnote
buried in the depths of C<perlhack>.

  Good if you can get it
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00605.html

=head2 Thread Exit

Jerry D. Hedden summarised the ongoing thread about threads, and
how they should be exited, and how much they should exit. Of note
was a post from Eric Rybski, who has been using the ithreads model
intensively over the past couple of years, and injected an interesting
point of view into the debate. In a nutshell: F<threads.pm>
should not impose global semantics on how threads operate.

  Last exit to Threadlyn
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00625.html

Before going too far down the wrong road, Jerry reported on
what he had come up with, and asked for feedback. Rafael
Garcia-Suarez appreciated the backwards-compatible aspects.

Jan Dubois was a bit uneasy about the behaviour of a thread calling
C<die>.

  This way out
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00638.html

And so it came to pass that Jerry released C<threads> version 1.37.
As a bonus, the reworking of C<Perl_ihtread_hook> appears to have
fixed bug #39839, although Dave Mitchell expressed doubt as to
whether the race condition that the bug cites has just been pushed
out somewhere else.

  Waterbeds
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00700.html

And some additional thready goodness also for 1.37.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00731.html

In preparing this patch, Jerry encountered what he thought was a
bug in F<test.pl> under MSWin32. It turned out to be a problem
with newlines in fragments of C<-e> code.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00725.html

=head2 C<perlbug> on Windows

Steve Hay was puzzled why C<perlbug> was not (apparently) working
on Windows, and traced it down to a Unixism that leads to a
two minute timeout on Windows. He considered a fix that would
work correctly in his corporate environment (using the
C<USERDNSDOMAIN> environment variable), but wondered if this
was applicable to the world at large.

  Code set free
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00659.html

=head2 C<B::> renovation, and the end of the C<perlcc> compiler

Joshua ben Jore produced a patch to overhaul C<B::>, to drag it kicking
and screaming into the 21st century (the module, not Joshua, although...)

One of his biggest gripes was with C<B::C> and C<B::CC>, that he
would rather see them jettisoned out the airlock, along with C<perlcc>
compiler, saying that all C<perlcc> really does is fixes bugs (in
the same way that flypaper fixes flies). Rafael agreed that this
was a very tempting suggestion.

Nicholas wondered if the cascade of events would lead to the removal
of C<ext/Byteloader> as well. Joshua put forward the best argument
for ditching all of it, and that was if anyone had a burning desire
to get anything along these lines working, their best chance lay
in hooking up with the Parrot and Pugs teams, because that was the
only way they would stand a chance of attracting the attention of
anyone who might be interested in seeing the task achieved. In the
meantime, the perl tarball would shrink, which is a bit of a bonus.

  At the end of the line
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00684.html

=head2 Using SV as key in hash

Elizabeth Mattijsen posted this question on Perlmonks but
received no useful answers, so she came and asked the porters.
She wanted to set a hash key to the contents of an SV. In
theory it would appear that the API supports this, however,
it doesn't work in practice. Unfortunately, the porters
didn't appear to have any special insight into the matter, either.

  Anyone?
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00701.html

=head1 Patches of Interest

=head2 Problem with autogenerated F<ppport.h> files (Change 28513)

Steve Hay encountered a minor problem due to the changes induced
by generating F<ppport.h> files on the fly. Marcus Holland-Moritz
welcomed the information, and whipped up a fix to solve the
problems. Steve gave it the green light, and Marcus uploaded a
new version of C<Devel::PPPort>.

  globby badness
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00721.html

=head2 z/OS: F<pp_sys.c>, F<reg*.c>, F<toke.c> and F<utf8.c>

Jarkko continued to untangle the useful bits from the z/OS patch
that the IBM developers posted a while back. He punted on
F<regexec.c>, citing too many differences in the codebase between
then and now, as well as philosophical differences.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00744.html

=head1 New and old bugs from RT

=head2 C<localtime(3)> calls C<tzset(3)> but C<localtime_r(3)> may not (#26136)

Benjamin Holzman delivered another version of the consolidated patch to
fix this up, but apparently it fell on the floor.

  ping
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00661.html

=head2 Switch module bug (#39789)

Steve Peters wondered whether it might be able to transmute the
C<Switch> module into the C<switch> feature now in C<blead>. Nicholas
Clark thought not, citing problems backwards incompatibility, and
wondered if anybody was particularly interested.

  Not bug-compatible, for a start
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00696.html

=head2 C<eval> and hash access in subroutine (#39816)

Thomas Ziehmer had a problem with a lexical going out of scope in
a package.  David Landgren offered a work-around, using an C<our>
or package variable.  Dave Mitchell explained why the behaviour was
the way it was.

Rick Delaney took Dave's example and tweaked it to produce a different
message that seemed to be more in line with the behaviour that
Thomas had encountered, and after a follow-up from Dave, we all
understood what was happening.

  Seeking closure
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00619.html

=head2 C<PERL5SHELL> is not checked for tainted data (#39832)

There was a lingering suspicion as to whether C<$ENV{SystemRoot}>
and C<$ENV{windir}> required taint checks on Win32, but Jan Dubois
thought that their use was benign as far as Perl was concerned.

  Caring for the environment
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00487.html

=head2 UTF-8-related crash (#39870)

"vvv" supplied a small program demonstrating a core dump with UTF-8.
Andreas Koenig explained that the best way to solve this problem
was to use C<use utf8> instead of C<use encoding 'utf8'>, whilst
cheerfully admitting that it was indeed a bug in C<use encoding>,
that continues to reside even in a recent version of C<blead>
(somewhere around patch 28603).

  Tis a bug
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00656.html

=head2 -0.0 loses signedness upon numeric comparison (#39875)

Zefram had a problem with -0.0 becoming 0.0 after a numeric comparison.
Yitzchak Scott-Thoennes proposed an interim fix, but asked for a
C<Configure> probe to check for the existence of a C routine
(C<signbit()>) needed to deal with the problem.

H.Merijn thought that this would mean that the bug would persist
on platforms that lacked the function, and Yitzchak agreed, and
asked H.Merijn whether an alternative function (C<copysign()>) would
be better. H.Merijn ran some code and produced some statistics of
its availability.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00674.html

=head2 C<Time::gmtime> 1.02 examples patch (#39876)

Alexandr Ciornii found some glaring errors in the the documentation to
C<Time::gmtime>. Steve Peters applied the fixes, and bumped the version
up to 1.03.

  About time
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00664.html

=head2 C<printf> and C<stat> out-of-order (#39880)

Someone thought they had encountered a problem with C<stat>, C<printf>
and temporary variables interacting in weird ways, but 'twas merely
another case of crypto-context.

  Foiled again
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00678.html

=head2 Inconsistent list slice behaviour (#39882)

Bo Lindbergh ran into problems with slices of empty lists, and found the
different behaviours of C<sort>, C<grep>, C<do> and company rather
inconsistent.

  There was probably a reason in the beginning
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00685.html

=head2 C<ISA> cache leaks into and out of C<Safe> compartments (#39887)

Marc Lehmann discovered, through a quirk in the method caching
code, that it is possible to have methods names leak into and out
of C<Safe> compartments. He proposed a quick work-around to avoid
his specific problem, and a tactical nuclear strike to solve the
problem in the general case, but wondered whether the latter was
too heavy-handed. At the other end of the spectrum there is the
possibility to simply document the behaviour and move on.

Nobody had sufficient motivation to comment one way or the other.

  Safety first
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00686.html

=head2 perl 5.8.8: RT 3.6.0: segfault in perl F<sv.c:5810> (#39893)

Peter Karl Mueller encountered some MySQL/UTF-8 grief in RT, and
asked for help.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00716.html

=head2 Docs for C<close> don't mention effect of stream error status (#39902)

Timbo took the time to explain that C<close> does The Right Thing,
no really, but the documentation doesn't clarify that it does, nor
what it is.

  The path to success
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00737.html

=head2 perl C compiler Can't locate object method C<IVX> via package C<B::NV> (#39903)

Tim Liim reported an error in some code that was compiled with the
C<perlcc> compiler (see also: Topics of Interest this week).

  I'm sorry Tim, I'm afraid I can't do that
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00736.html

=head2 Regular expression whitespace character has different meanings in UTF-8 and single-byte modes (#39912)

"shadrinovdd" had a problem with character 160, which, when interpreted
according to ISO Latin-1 rules, is a non-breaking space. And this
causes different user-visible behaviours to emerge, depending on
whether the UTF-8 flag is switched on for the string.

Much discussion ensued as to what the right course of action should
be.

  Lost in space
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00754.html

=head2 Perl5 Bug Summary

  Back below 1500 again
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00601.html

  http://rt.perl.org/rt3/NoAuth/perl5/Overview.html

=head1 New Core Modules

=over 4

=item *

C<Sys-Syslog> version 0.17 hit the CPAN, thanks to the tireless
efforts of Sébastien Aperghis-Tramoni.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00746.html

=back

=head1 In Brief

Jarkko Hietaniemi was all in favour of B<making C<Math::Complex>
more C<bignum>-savvy>, but admitted to not knowing how to make
it so.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00670.html

Steve Hay produced a series of test cases to isolate B<a C<mod_perl>
1.x problem using bleadperl>. Rafael thought he had the right fix,
but that didn't work. Dave Mitchell was too busy in the real world
to look. The problem remains.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00502.html

Gabor Szabo suggested adding some B<links to standard modules in
C<perlfunc>>.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00579.html

Jarkko made B<magic vtables C<const> if C<PERL_GLOBAL_STRUCT_PRIVATE>>
is defined, perhaps in an attempt to revive the Symbian port.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00592.html

Yves Orton had a stab at B<silencing more warnings when compiling
the regexp engine>, but gnashed his teeth at recalcitrant C<printf>
format strings that refused to play the game.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00617.html

Bill Kurland wondered whether the mailing list  was B<the best place
to ask question regarding regular expression test failures>.

  Probably, yes.
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00657.html

Ashish Agarwal had some B<trouble with the C<Convert-IBM390-0.22>
module>, which was in fact an interesting case study of Unix
encountering EBCDIC.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00673.html

Tim Bunce needed B<help spotting a leak> in the DBI internals.
Nicholas Clark spotted something that looked fishy. Tim was thrilled,
then saddened, since afterwards, while the code leaked less, it
continued to leak a bit.

  The story of my bathroom tap repairs
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00653.html

Andreas Koenig later reported a problem with B<C<DBI> breaking on
C<blead>>. Not having a copy handy, Tim asked Andreas to try a
one-liner fix. After this failed to work, Tim promised to pull
down the latest C<blead> and see what needed to be done.

  After OSCON
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00672.html

David Nicol put forward a B<magical vtable proposal>. Nicholas Clark
said that it sounded like a serious undertaking with the possibility
that the code could be scrapped after much toiling. So he didn't
feel like doing it.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00699.html

Hugo van der Sanden spotted some code in C<Net::Cmd> that was
performing a C<last> when it should really have been performing a
C<return>, and wondered if anyone agreed with his analysis.

  Silence
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00745.html

Jarkko taught DEC OSF to use C<-g3> if both C<-O> and C<-g> are
specified.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00747.html

=head2 About this summary

This summary was written by David Landgren.

The p5p summaries will now have a four week recess. I'm off to
Australia to go traipsing around rain forests, the Barrier Reef and
Sydney Harbour. With a bit of luck, I won't have to turn a computer
on at all.

Writing these summaries has been fun, albeit exhausting at times,
and I'm looking forward to having a rest for a while. I hope you
have enjoyed reading them. I'll be back in time for YAPC::EU in
Birmingham, where I shall try to summarise the the highlights between
now and then, jet-lagged out of my mind in the back of the auditorium.

If you want a bookmarklet approach to viewing bugs and change
reports, there are a couple of bookmarklets that you might find
useful on my page of Perl stuff:

  http://www.landgren.net/perl/

Weekly summaries are published on F<http://use.perl.org/> and posted
on a mailing list, (subscription: F<perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org>).
The archive is at F<http://dev.perl.org/perl5/list-summaries/>.
Corrections and comments are welcome.

If you found this summary useful, please consider contributing to
the Perl Foundation to help support the development of Perl.
