=head1 This Week on perl5-porters - 24-30 April 2006

Lots of work consting, compiling and testing perl this week.

=head1 Topics of Interest

=head2 Running hard just to stand still

Nicholas Clark commented on Jerry D. Hedden's cry for help concerning
the slow application of his C<threads> patches, and wondered what
do other open source languages, such as Lua, Python, Ruby and Tcl
cope with the day-to-day drudgery of sifting through bug reports,
shepherding the changes to the code base, and generally making sure
that the project keeps moving forward.

  Holding the fort
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00905.html

=head2 New taint tests cause threaded FreeBSD to hang

Nicholas Clark saw that some new taint tests were causing perl to
hang on recent versions FreeBSD, and wondered what to do about it.
Steve Peters reproduced the problem on OpenBSD as well.

On the other hand, Dominic Dunlop gave Mac OS/X Darwin a clean bill
of health (despite the fact that it is derived from FreeBSD).

Anton Berezin (B<the> man for Perl on FreeBSD) suggested linking with
a different threads library. Everything worked when Nicholas tried
that, leading him to conclude that F<hints/freebsd.sh> could do with
an update.

  I'll give you a hint
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00901.html

=head2 Rebuilding XS modules for threaded perl

Peter Scott wanted some "best practices" advice on how to build a threaded
and non-threaded perl, and have them coexist peacefully, falling back on
the unthreaded perl for all the ancillary tools such as C<perldoc> and
C<perlbug>. Specifically, and hence the title of his message, he wanted
to know if he could get away with using the same compilation of XS
modules for both perl instances.

Jan Dubois clarified the situation, explaining that threaded and
unthreaded perls are binary incompatible, so modules with XS components
need to be recompiled, and need to be installed in separate locations (so
that the associated perl picks up the right libraries for itself).

Andy Dougherty welcomed Peter's suggestion to patch the documentation
with his findings.

  We build them here, we build them there, we build these modules everywhere
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00910.html

=head2 Using C</> and C<X> in C<unpack>

Peter Dintelmann had a question concerning the ability to walk back
the stream with C<unpack>. He was trying to understand how to do
it but was struggling with the paucity of information. Sadahiro
Tomoyuki explained exactly how it worked, even going so far as to
examine the C source and realise that the error checking could do
with a little tightening up.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00915.html

Tomoyuki's explanation was just what Peter needed.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00993.html

=head2 Refitting F<t/op/*.t> files to use C<test.pl>

David Landgren started to work on refitting F<t/op/pat.t> to use
C<test.pl>, which would make it simpler and easier to add new tests.
He had a couple of questions, mainly concerning how to modernise
some fairly archaic tests.

Andy Lester was thrilled. Nicholas Clark recalled that one useful
feature that test.pl does not have but should, is the management
of temporary files. Being able to create them on demand, and clean
them up automatically at the end of the script. Apparently this
sort of make-work code is scattered throughout the test suite.

  Into the third millenium we go
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00919.html

David also had a look at a section in  F<t/op/pat.t> for patterns
that warn when compiled and wondered whether a particularly intricate
collection of closures was in fact a no-op. No takers.

  The sound of chain-saw warming up
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00893.html

The new version was finally delivered. It generated a lot of discussion,
but alas, remained unapplied.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00946.html

=head2 Use of C<eval> in F<t/op/append.t>

David then looked at F<t/op/append.t> and saw that some of the test
results were C<eval>'ed (rather than the thing being tested), and
also wondered why the tests were tested with regexps instead of
comparison operators. Sadahiro Tomoyuki explained that the tests
were there to see if concatenation stops on C<\0> (binary zero),
and regexps were used instead of comparison operators, in case the
comparisons also had an equivalent bug which stopped them scanning
on C<\0>.

Which led David to wonder if there wasn't a just as likely possibility
for regexps to also stop on C<\0>, in which case something like
C<rindex> might be better, since it would never encounter any dubious
characters.

Tomoyuki thought that the C<eval> was no longer necessary (although
it does mean that things happen at run-time rather than at compile-time,
which may have an influence).

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg01000.html

Elsewhere, David looked at the tests in F<t/op/grep.t> and was
surprised to discover that some tests can pass, and print C<ok>, or
they can fail, and print... nothing.

  As long as everything works
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg01065.html

=head2 Perl on Win98

David Bree asked for advice on compiling perl on Windows 98 using MinGW. He
had in fact compiled it, but was wondering whether it was safe to install,
since about five percent of the tests failed. Which doesn't seem to shabby.
Unfortunately, no-one was able to offer any advice.

  Maybe if we knew what had failed
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00940.html

=head2 Merging C<wince> and C<win32> directories

Yves Orton started to tackle the long-talked-about much-awaited merge of
the C<wince> and C<win32> directories, that contain the platform-specific
extensions for the Windows CE platform on one hand, and Windows in general
on the other.

Vadim Vladimirovich Konovalov (hereafter referred to as Vadim) promised
to add some improvements to the WinCE side, and was pleased to see that
someone was taking the necessary time to clean up the source tree. He
also mentioned the existence of a C<perlce.sf.net> project, but that it
is pretty calm at the moment.

Yves's approach was to create a new C<win> directory, starting with
the contents of C<win32>, and then see what happened as he pushed
and poked bits of C<wince> into it, until there is nothing left
over.

  Where do you want Perl to go today?
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00983.html

=head2 F<t/op/stat.t> failures on C<z/OS>

Mohammad Yaseen reported the difficulties he was having with 5.8.7
on z/OS (the IBM mainframe OS). In this instance, F<t/op/stat.t>
was failing with messages about F</dev/tty>, depending on whether
the test was run in single-user or multi-user mode.

Jim Cromie asked for some specific details, to help understand
what single-user and multi-user means in the context of z/OS.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg01007.html

=head2 Clawing scarce bits back from the magic vtable structure

As Nicholas happily integrated a change from C<blead> to C<maint>
concerning bitmask flags on a field in the magic vtable structure,
he realised that there weren't a whole lot of spare bits that
remained, and even though code with the first definitions of those
flags has been out in the wild for some time, he wondered if some
of the newer bitmask flags could be reeled back in.

Dave Mitchell thought that three flags could be freed up, since
they were either marked as being wildly experimental, or not
documented at all.

  Peak bits
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg01017.html

=head2 C<taint> and C<fork> on Win32

David Golden had been taking a VanillaPerl on Win32 for a spin, and
noticed that C<Test::WWW::Mechanize> kept dying a horrible death.
Carl Franks and he narrowed it down to a delightfully simple snippet:
C<perl -Te fork> and then searched the bug database but found nothing
similar. So he wanted to know whether to file a bug report, or
whether the failure mode was common knowledge. No takers.

  Can't have your fork and taint it
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg01039.html

=head2 Is a C<FileHandle> C<IO::Seekable>?

Adam Kennedy related the problems he was having after having taken over
the maintenance of C<Archive::Zip>. In a nutshell, he needs to have
seekable file handles. And yet it turns out that at one point in the
test suite, a file handle winds up being connected to a pipe, which
definitely is not seekable. So Adam wanted to know if something was
truly seekable, as opposed to merely having a C<seek> method.

The best Randy W. Sims could come up with was a kluge with file
test operators.

  Seeking advice
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg01083.html

=head1 Patches of Interest

=head2 The continuing saga of the improvements to the regexp engine

Yves Orton repatched his trie work to simplify the sharing of the
code base between C<blead> and C<maint>.

  Nice trie
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00839.html

5.8.0 could be supported as well, if there was some way to fake C<SAVEBOOL>
via F<ppport.h>.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00843.html

Reini Urban showed what needed to be done to get it to compile with
the ActivePerl source.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00909.html

http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00888.html

=head2 C<const>ing goodness

Andy Lester took a crack at B<adding some C<const>ing goodness to
F<doop.c>>, but Sadahiro Tomoyuki pointed out a mistake. So Andy
took had another go at it. Not applied, as far as I can see.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00846.html

He then killed a modal boolean that controlled the behaviour of
C<S_glob_2inpuv> in F<sv.c>, preferring to split the functionality
into two different routines. Applied.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00847.html

Andy then carried on, inlining a couple of static routines in
F<perl.c>.  Also applied.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00848.html

Andy found reasons to use C<NOOP> macro, part one.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00869.html

Moving right along, he removed some unused (or rather, useless) casts in
F<regcomp.c> and F<regexec.c>, which prompted Yves Orton to comment that
when he was working on adding trie support to the regexp engine, he found
those casts to be quite helpful in figuring out what was going on.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00928.html

He had more luck removing unused context in F<sv.c>.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00943.html

And another context parameter in F<pp_ctl.c>, with some C<const>ing
goodness thrown in for good measure.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00959.html

And some more places in which he could tweak the usage of C<SvREFCNT_inc>
calls.

  In mg.c
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg01100.html

  and pp_ctl.c
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg01102.html

And some compiler warnings in F<perlio.c>.

  And that's what Andy did this week
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg01101.html

=head2 Using C<v?snprintf>/C<strlcpy>/C<strlcat> when useful

Jarkko Hietaniemi patched a number of files to use the C run-time equivalent
string routines (that have been vetted as working correctly at build
time) rather than alternative, less safe routines. Jarkko asked for eyeballs
to look carefully at the patch in case there were any glaring errors.

Steve Peters took the patch for a spin on the platforms he had lying around.
In the meantime, Jarkko found a section in F<pp_ctl.c> that he had missed.

H.Merijn Brand wondered what the status was concerning these routines, since
on some proprietary platforms, the C source to these routines had some fairly
fussy copyright noticed attached. Steve said he had dug up the source to the
Perl routines from an old copy of C<inn>, and believed that they were in the
public domain.

Russ Allbery said that he authored C<inn>, and that Steve was perfectly
entitled to having taken them for use in perl. This prompted H.Merijn to
suggest removing the C<#ifdef> trickery surrounding the calls to these
routines, and instead use them everywhere, and bundle Russ's public domain
code to be used on platforms that don't provide them.

  New uses for old
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00874.html

=head2 Symbian, C<dVAR> and C<-DPERL_GLOBAL_STRUCT_PRIVATE>

Jarkko continued on his B<C<dVAR> quest with C<-DPERL_GLOBAL_STRUCT_PRIVATE>>
to move Perl C run-time data to the heap. As he marked a previously C<const>
variable as non-constant, Andy Lester insisted on a full report. Jarkko
explained what had happened, and Andy thought of another approach. Jarkko
urged Andy to proceed cautiously, as it concerns only the Symbian port as
is also rather fragile. Any changes must be tested with
C<PERL_GLOBAL_STRUCT_PRIVATE> and C<PERL_GLOBAL_STRUCT>

  Do not meddle in the affairs of Jarkko
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00969.html

And then sent in another C<dVAR> patch, this time to make perl's
C<malloc> happy, plus some corrections to fix up some signed/unsigned
mismatches that had crept in when no-one was looking.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg01030.html

=head2 C<gcc -ansi -pedantic> noise reduction

The patches kept rolling in from way up north, this time cleaning
up the worst of the damage when one lets C<gcc -ansi -pendantic>
loose on the source (it screams a lot). He recommended that porters
build perl from time to time using these two compiler options, and
taking the appropriate action based on the fallout. Steve Peters
applied the patch. Andy Lester was pleased.

  I dare you
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg01037.html

=head2 Another handy tip for the code police

And wrapping up, Jarkko offered a handy tip for people who enjoyed
torture-testing the compilation of the codebase, to use the C<-O>
C<gcc> compiler switch in conjunction with C<-Wall> (warn about
everything). It turns out that some code checks don't kick in until
the optimizer is brought to bear on the code. Andy Lester wanted
to know if different C<-O> levels kicked in successive classes of
warnings.

  Cheap trick
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg01056.html

Andy posted the armada of compilation switches that he uses to compile
the source.

  -Wextra is good for a laugh, too
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg01086.html

=head2 Patching various F<t/op> test files to use F<test.pl>

David Landgren sent in a some patches to for files in F<t/op> to
use F<test.pl>, instead of their home-grown each-one-different methods.
One main benefit is that now the tests have names, so when test 43 fails,
it becomes trivial to locate it in the source file.

In the process, he also found an nice bug of a string comparison using
numeric equality in F<t/op/loopctl.t>.

  t/op/auto.pl
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg01001.html

  t/op/defins.pl
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg01003.html

  t/op/delete.t
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg01005.html

  t/op/glob.t
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg01068.html

  t/op/hashwarn.t
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg01072.html

  t/op/loopctl.t
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00964.html

  t/op/sort.pl (or what I did over my lunch hours this week)
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00962.html

(Summariser's note: At first I wasn't sure how I was going to summarise this,
but Jim Cromie sort of forced my hand).

  It's all Jim's fault
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg01012.html

=head2 Clarifying the C<Fatal.pm> documentation

Tom Regner had a discussion with Ilya Zakharevich on C<comp.lang.perl.modules>
about C<Fatal>, and the result of the discussion was a POD patch. Unapplied.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg01047.html

=head1 Watching the smoke signals

=head2 Smoke [5.9.4] 28020 FAIL(M) MSWin32 Win2000 SP4 (x86/1 cpu)

Abe Timmerman identified this failure as the result of the Windows
part of the code base not finding change #27992 to its taste.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg01090.html

=head2 Smoke [5.9.4] 28009 FAIL(Xm) irix 6.2 (IP22/1 cpu)

In this report, it appears that something had gone wrong with the C<gcc>
C run-time library during the configuration phase.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg01092.html

=head1 New and old bugs from RT

=head2 Many bizarre bugs

Animator discovered that the B<bizarre code leads to bizarre ARRAY
assignment> (bug #9374) had been fixed in 5.8.8 and 5.9.3. Andreas
Koenig identified change #25828 as being the one responsible for
the fix.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00967.html

In a similar bug report (#3112), Animator simplified the snippet that
causes a B<bizarre copy of ARRAY in C<last>>. No-one attempted a fix
for the time being,

  for (1) { push @a, last; }
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00968.html

and bug #9540 still produced B<C<Bizarre copy of HASH>> errors,

  @{my %self; %self}{1} = 1;
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00974.html

while #22238 continued to give you a B<Bizarre copy of HASH in leave>

  @{ my %self; %self }{1} = 1;
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00975.html

and for the last in a series of bizarre bug reports, Animator noted that
bug #36229 (Bizarre copy of IO) is a duplicate of an earlier bug (#3314).

  $a = ${*STDOUT{IO}}
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00976.html

So don't do that.

=head2 C<unpack> fails on utf-8 strings (#33734)

Nicholas Clark returned to the problem raised by Marc A. Lehmann back in 
early 2005 and explained what he had done with Ton's code, which fixed up
the problem in a perhaps non-backwards-compatible manner. Glenn Linderman
wondered whether the new C<pack>/C<unpack> semantics could not be bundled
into a loadable module and made available via a feature pragma.

Marc Lehmann thought that C<unpack> should simply be fixed (the problem
is how C<unpack> behaves in the face of UTF-8 data) once and for all. If
the fix is too major, then it will appear in 5.10. If it can be arranged
to not break anything already relying on the current behaviour, then it
can be fixed in 5.8.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00958.html

=head2 Perl build problem (failing C<File::Basename>) (#38891)

Dominic Dunlop nudged this bug report, requesting more information. No
response received as we went to the press.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00889.html

=head2 double free detected (#38943)

Ulrich Windl coaxed a C<*** glibc detected *** double free or corruption> out
of the debugger. Neither Dave Mitchell nor Nicholas Clark were unable to
reproduce the problem on the perls and platforms they had on hand.

Michael Shroeder remembered that Ulrich had already reported a
similar problem with C<Term-ReadLine-Gnu>, and wondered if the two
problems were related, and Ulrich concurred that it appeared to be
a problem concerning the C C<libreadline> library in his SuSE
distribution.

  SEP
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00651.html

=head2 debugger can't breakpoint until module loaded (#38966)

Albert Cahalan was debugging some unfamiliar code, and wanted to
set a breakpoint in some as-yet-unseen code, and wondered why the
debugger was refusing to do so, given that C<gdb> will prompt for
more information when in similar circumstances when debugging C
code.

Rafael wondered if C<b postpone I<subname>> would do the trick.
Albert agreed that that was just the ticket, but thought that the
debugger could be tweaked to ask whether one wished to postpone the
breakpoint if the routine was currently unknown to the debugger.

People missed the point, and started making fun of Albert, suggesting
that if he didn't know what he wanted to debug, he should connect
the debugger to C<Symbol::Approx::Sub> in order to breakpoint on a
routine that most closely matched.

Albert replied calmly with an example involving C<gdb> that made
perfect sense. The main obstacle to adding this functionality is
that everyone suddenly appears to be very busy Doing Other Stuff
when it comes to patching the debugger.

  Wouldn't it be nice
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00879.html

=head2 F<t/op/getppid.t> fails in a Solaris Zone (#39010)

Mark Suter reported a failure in F<t/op/getppid.t>, that is due to a
changed assumption concerning the owning pid of an orphaned process
(hint: it is not 1). It turns out that Sun had been kind enough to
loan the porters a Solaris machine with zones set up, and the bug had
been found and fixed four weeks ago.

  Coming to a 5.8.9 near you
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00978.html

=head2 Attempt to free unreferenced scalar (#39012)

Salvador Fandiño filed a bug report with a nice short snippet showing
how to provoke an C<Attempt to free unreferenced scalar> error. After
a bit of thought, Dave Mitchell showed how it could be simplified
even further. And then after a bit more thought, patched F<scope.t>
to fix the problem, and rolled the snippet into a test for F<t/op/local.t>.

  All in a day's work
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00955.html

=head2 Segfault in functional streams/bug in closure allocation? (#39017)

C<christian@pflanze> tried to create an infinite stream with
closures but the only thing he managed to create were core dumps. Dave
Mitchell explained that it wasn't actually closure-related, but yet
another manifestation of the recursive implementation used to free
recursive data structures.

  Make a deep structure, eat up all your C stack
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg01048.html

Christian returned with a follow-up, showing how he had managed to
get it to almost but not quite work (but at least it no longer crashed).

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg01051.html

The thread returned under the title of Garbage collection issues
later on, where Christian wondered about a couple of issues he was
having with his code. Dave Mitchell explained precisely what was
happening, and then asked Christian to explain what he was really
trying to do. Once Dave understood what Christian wanted, he realised
the proposed code was far too complex, and sketched out an alternative
approach, with negligible memory requirements to boot.

Yves thought that what Christian was trying to do was shoehorn Lisp
idioms into Perl, and suggested he take a look at Mark-Jason Dominus's
Higher Order Perl.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg01049.html

  HOP to it
  http://hop.plover.com/

=head2 C<Pod::Html> generates incorrect href's in some html anchors (#39020)

"bgstewart" filed a problem with some incorrectly generated HTML from POD.
Steve Peters explained that it had already been fixed. Tels thought there
was a bug in the source POD, and backed up his assertion with a report
from C<podcheck>. Russ thought the POD was valid, just somewhat unusual.

  Merely plain, not simple
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg01061.html

=head2 C<Tie::Memoize::EXISTS> not caching the value (#39026)

This was reported as a bug, but no-one commented on it.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg01060.html

=head2 Perl5 Bug Summary

Another decline in the number of tickets noted this week.

  13 created + 27 closed (yay!) = 1525
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00873.html

  What outstanding bugs
  http://rt.perl.org/rt3/NoAuth/perl5/Overview.html

=head1 New Core Modules

=over 8

=item *

The C<dor> (C<//>) patch was refreshed by H.Merijn Brand as F<dor-588-27985.diff>,
following some tweaks to F<perly.y>.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00982.html

=item *

C<Module::Build> 0.28 released by Ken Williams.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg01027.html

This followed a patch to C<blead> from Steve Hay to fix up some problems on
Win32 following the upgrade of C<Test-Harness>.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00900.html

=back

=head1 In Brief

The B<C<select((select(OUTPUT_HANDLE), $| = 1)[0])>> thread evolved into
a discussion about B<sequence points> in Perl.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00766.html

Rafael looked at Marcus Holland-Moritz's B<patch to clean up 212
warnings emitted by C<gcc-4.2>> and applied 4 out of 5 parts, the
last part seeming to be superfluous. Marcus commented in more
detail on the reasons behind the patches.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00817.html

Craig Berry made a belated followup to Ken Williams's B<C<File::Spec>
changes for VMS>, giving it a clean bill of health.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00823.html

Nicholas dropped some of recent tweaks to C<blead>'s version of
C<Test::Harness> in order to keep it perfectly synchronised with
the latest CPAN version.

  Stamping out gratuitous differences
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00827.html

The problem concerning B<multi-line attributes and C<Attribute::Handlers>>
noted by Bas van Sisseren (#38475), and its required fix to F<toke.c>
was applied by Rafael, and the example was turned into a regression
test.

  Won't see that again
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00856.html

Rafael also applied the fix suggested in B<opening C<|-> triggers unjustified
taint check>. (#38709)

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00858.html

Jerry D. Hedden B<continued to sync C<threads> with C<blead>>. Applied.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00871.html

And then he B<consolidated some C<XS> functions>. Also applied.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00898.html

Here's one that was missed in C<maint>:

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00918.html

And another that was caught:

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00934.html

Nicholas Clark revived the B<C<POSIX> build fails in C<bleadperl>
and C<RTMAX> patch> bug (#36951). David Dyck confirmed that it is
still alive and kicking,

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00977.html

and closed out the B<utf8 overload stringify bug> (#34297), saying that
it was fixed in C<blead> and that he hoped to backport it to 5.8.9.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg01024.html

He then showed how B<C<uc>/C<lc>/C<ucfirst>/C<lcfirst> fail on typeglobs> on
5.8.8 in bug #39019. The bug doesn't manifest itself on C<blead>, but that is
because it's typeglob implementation is quite different these days.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg01025.html

Joshua ben Jore wondered B<how to interpret the meanings of the MAD keys>.

  No-one else knew, either
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg01040.html

Nicholas Clark wondered why B<C<lc> and friends don't taint empty strings> 
when locales are in effect (bug #39028). Sadahiro Tomoyuki gave his thoughts
on the matter, explaining that perl was probably Doing The Right Thing.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg01067.html

Abe Timmerman fixed up B<C<snsprintf> and C<vsnsprintf> problems for MSVC>
on the Windows platform.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg01096.html

=head2 About this summary

This summary was written by David Landgren.

If you want a bookmarklet approach to viewing bugs and change reports,
there are a couple of bookmarklets that you might find useful on
my page of Perl stuff:

  http://www.landgren.net/perl/

Weekly summaries are published on F<http://use.perl.org/> and posted
on a mailing list, (subscription: F<perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org>).
The archive is at F<http://dev.perl.org/perl5/list-summaries/>.
Corrections and comments are welcome.

If you found this summary useful or enjoyable, please consider
contributing to the Perl Foundation to help support the development
of Perl.
