=head1 This (unfinished) Week on perl5-porters - 19-25 June 2006

I<"I estimate that it would take approximately 2000 CPU years to smoke all 
of CPAN on a reasonable set of platforms."> -- Adam Kennedy, 2000 light
years from home.

=head1 Topics of Interest

[summariser's note: the week was too busy for me to spend the
required time to bring the summary to a close, so here's the
best I could do. Regretfully, I am unable to summarise Nicholas
Clark's excellent follow-ups to the Perl 5 advocacy thread that
was kicked off the week before. Interested readers are invited
to dive back into the thread to chase them down.]

  Once upon a time
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00477.html

=head2 Bringing C<Win32API::File> into the core

This was in some ways fall-out from the advocacy thread last week.
By bringing this module into core, it would ease installing CPAN
modules on the new non-ActiveState Windows-based Perl distributions
that are coming to light (that is, distributions that don't use
ActiveState's C<ppm> installer but instead use source tarballs
directly from CPAN).

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00710.html

=head2 Expressions of interest in regular expressions

Dave Mitchell reported that he reworked the C<TRIE> regop to
work with the new state stack mechanism, thereby removing more
recursion from the regular expression engine. Yves Orton was impressed
that Dave taken Yves's code in his stride, and announced that he
was planning to introduce another regop in the future for other
kinds of tries.

  Going cursive
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00903.html

Yves Orton followed up on a question Tels asked last week, about
benchmarking regular expression performance

  A fair fight
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00664.html

=head2 C<warn>ing at C<exit> if detached threads still running

It used to be that if a thread was still running at C<exit> time, a
warning was generated. So a patch was written to suppress it.
Jerry D. Hedden questioned the rationale, pointing out that someone,
somewhere, might find this useful sometime.

He thought that a nicer way of dealing with this would be via C<no warnings 'threads'>,
except that it doesn't work. Rafael Garcia-Suarez explained what hoops one
would have to jump through in the C source to do so. Jerry noted that the
different functions Rafael cite are not documented, and wanted to know what
the differences were between them. Rafael explained the differences, and
suggested looking through the source for a sample of uses.

  A fair warning
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00658.html

=head2 Thread hook not called on C<exit>

In other threads news, Jerry also discovered how a small thread that does
nothing but C<exit> will not call the C<PL_threadhook> handler and wondered
what to do about it. Jan Dubois thought that the best thing to do would be
to put the thread running code in a C<setjmp>/C<longjmp>-style wrapper.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00674.html

=head2 Calling C<exit> from a thread

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00736.html

=head2 Can't suppress 'treads still running' warning

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00766.html

=head2 threads 1.33

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00769.html

=head2 threads 1.33 (revised)

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00818.html

=head2 What about CPAN smoke?

Tom Horsley kicked off a thread about testing CPAN.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00800.html

=head1 Patches of Interest

=head2 IO::Compress::* 2.000_13

First steps in implementing the zip64 algorithm in Perl. As there is no
real reference implementation, and the specs are vague in places, Paul
Marquess kicked this out the door to see whether it flies or smokes.

  The 64 bit question
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00714.html

=head2 Localizing temporary variables

Andy Lester pulled some variables down into tighter scopes in F<regexec.c>,
in an attempt to make it easier to read and follow.

  Bedtime reading
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00631.html

=head2 perlhack.pod

A sensible improvement to F<perlhack.pod> from Dr. Ruud.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00826.html

=head1 Watching the smoke signals

A couple of smokes drew some comments.

=head2 Smoke [5.9.4] 28402 FAIL(F) MSWin32 WinXP/.Net SP2 (x86/2 cpu)

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00725.html

=head2 Smoke [5.9.4] 28410 FAIL(Fm) MSWin32 WinXP/.Net SP2 (x86/2 cpu)

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00783.html

=head1 New and old bugs from RT

=head2 Memory leak occurs when an C<eval> statement exits by a signal (#38854)

Dominic Dunlop followed up on this April bug with some cogent
analysis that pinned the blame on calling C<die()> within a signal
handler, but lacked the time to dig more deeply into the problem.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00860.html

=head2 Bug in F<toke.c> (C<s//#/e>) (#39365)

Rafael applied bcarter's patch to fix this problem, and added a
regression test to make sure it never comes back.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00699.html

=head2 Problem on installing C<DBI> module (very Urgent) (#39527)

Dominic and Yves went the extra mile to help solve this problem, even
though it had nothing to do with p5p's charter.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00647.html

=head2 C<*** glibc detected *** free(): invalid pointer> from C<Perl_mg_free> (#39528)

Chris at financial was having a problem (like a segfault) with the
C<CentOS> packages of C<apache>, C<mod_perl> and C<perl> and asked
for help. Nicholas regretted to announce that he didn't have the
faintest idea what was happening, and suggested either trying to
reproduce the problem using only core modules, or asking C<CentOS>
for support.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00648.html

=head2 C<printf>: bad formatting of hexadecimal conversion of binary string using vector flag (#39530)

Sadahiro Tomoyuki and Dominic Dunlop raced each other to see who could develop
the best patch for this bug in the shortest possible time (some issue with
formatting v-strings). In the process, it appears that Ravi S. Kadali from
IBM is able to run smoke tests against C<blead> on the z/OS platform. This
will do wonders for smoking out EBCDIC oddities.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00678.html

=head2 Multiple threads + backticks + Win32 = intermittent hangs (#39531)

Keith Doyle found that multiple threads that backtick or popen kids will
hang at random, which is admittedly less than ideal. Unfortunately he
received no feedback on the issue.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00676.html

=head2 C<make test> fails with C<getppid> in a Solaris 10 zone (#39536)

Jie Gao discovered a problem with F<op/getppid.t> on C<maint>. Dominic
thought that the test from C<blead>, which has been rewritten, would
possibly do the tricked and asked Jie Gao to take it for a spin, to see
if it resolved the failure.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00689.html

=head2 Bug in system calls when C<%ENV> is very large (#39547)

Alex Keim had a problem on the Win32 platform with environments
approaching or exceeding 32K in size. Steve Hay was able to
reproduce the problem and found that it only manifested itself
in threaded builds. Jan Dubois and Dr. Ruud suggested some other
workarounds (basically, use a file, memory-mapped or otherwise,
rather than the environment to pass large slabs of data to kids).

Alex still found that an environment that gave C<cmd> (the Win32
shell) no trouble caused Perl grief, pointing to a problem with
perl's environment handling.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00794.html

=head2 C<Text::Wrap>: "This shouldn't happen" happens (#39548)

A "cannot happen" bug in C<Text::Wrap> surfaced with this bug
report. Dominic chose to punt the issue for a while, to see
what the current maintainer of the module had to say.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00777.html

=head2 Updating to 5.8.8 (#39572)

Laurent had a strange problem with a tarball for perl 5.8.8
that seemed to be lacking a couple of example files, according
to the manifest. Dominic offered what advice he could.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00832.html

=head2 Pattern Match fails for specific length string (#39583)

Erik R. Ogan discovered that 5.8.8 would fail to match a string
that ought to have 32767 characters matched by C<(.*?)>.

  Funny about that
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00871.html

=head2 Problem with C<make test> in perl-5.8.8 (#39613)

Ravi kumar Ravi had some problems with protocol name resolution
causing a handful of tests to failed. No followups.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00901.html

=head2 C<PerlProc_setjmp> undefined under C<WIN32> (#39614)

Jerry D. Hedden's latest patch to the threads library makes use
of a few functions (C<dJMPENV>, C<JMPENV_PUSH> and C<JMPENV_POP>)
that are not available when compiling ActiveState Perl from
source.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00885.html

=head2 Perl5 Bug Summary

  + 5 - 2 = 1493
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00642.html

  The List
  http://rt.perl.org/rt3/NoAuth/perl5/Overview.html

=head1 New Core Modules

=over 4

=item *

C<Sys-Syslog> version 0.16 uploaded by Sébastien Aperghis-Tramoni,
and Rafael updated C<blead> with this version.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00775.html

This in turn allowed Sébastien to close a couple of old bugs:

  #20557
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00773.html

  #35406
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00771.html

=item *

C<CPANPLUS> version 0.072 was uploaded to CPAN by Jos Boumans. No, it's
not core, but may be one day. The fact that overall RAM usage has declined
in this release (as per the release notes) is certainly a welcome step
in this direction.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00889.html

=item *

A sleeker C<Devel::PPPort> version 3.08_06 was integrated into
C<blead> by Marcus Holland-Moritz. He shrunk the size of the tarball
significantly, by generating F<PPPort.pm> and F<PPPort.xs> on the
fly during the build. On the other hand, this cause C<Configure>
to come to grief, since as it didn't see a F<PPPort.xs> at the
beginning, it went ahead and built the non-XS version.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00928.html

=back

=head1 In Brief

Philippe M. Chiasson tracked down and reinstated the B<missing files
from the APC archive>.

  Full recovery
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00670.html

Nicholas Clark thought of a way of sidestepping the bogosity
introduced by the B<Intel C<icc> compiler pretending to be C<gcc>>.

  Almost but not quite more than we deserve
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00936.html

Tom Christiansen wrote about B<the legibility myth> and it sparked off
an interesting discussion about typography and the written word.

  ¡hola!
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00625.html

Tom also continued with a discussion of B<parenthetical perils>.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00633.html

Dr Ruud cooked up a tiny patch for F<toke.c> to fix B<C<isALNUM(*s) && *s != '_'>>.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00782.html

Paul Marquess solved a B<problem in C<make test> with multiple F<Makefile.PL>s>.

  Need to know
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00792.html

Paul also wondered why C<-r> and C<-w> don't work as expected when applied
to C<\*STDIN> and C<\*STDOUT> on Win32.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00799.html

David Landgren ran a smoke at one point last week and reported B<a few failures
in the maint snapshot>. Hmm, maybe after I get the summary out the door I'll
go and see what's happening with it now.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00791.html

John E. Malmberg wanted to know B<if the rsync server was stuck at
C<blead@28402>>.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00829.html

=head1 Stuff I didn't have time to go through

Feel free to follow the links if the subject grabs your attention.

=head2 $^V ge "\5\x08\0" throws a warning

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00824.html

=head2 [PATCH] IO::Compress::Base

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00835.html

=head2 C<Configure -Aprepend>

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00848.html

=head2 handling Unicode newlines

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00908.html

=head2 C<Devel::PPPort> broken in latest blead on Win32

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00913.html

=head2 C<MEM_WRAP_CHECK> has bogus logic on HP/UX

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00919.html

=head2 Thread Tutorial lock() scope

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00925.html

=head2 About this summary

This summary was written by David Landgren. The paragraph reformatter
C<fmt(1)> that comes with my OS is not 8-bit clean, and it ate the
"é" in Sébastien Aperghis-Tramoni name in the previous summary. My
apologies to Sébastien. I hear there's a text processing language
that is good at doing this sort of stuff...

If you want a bookmarklet approach to viewing bugs and change
reports, there are a couple of bookmarklets that you might find
useful on my page of Perl stuff:

  http://www.landgren.net/perl/

Weekly summaries are published on F<http://use.perl.org/> and posted
on a mailing list, (subscription: F<perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org>).
The archive is at F<http://dev.perl.org/perl5/list-summaries/>.
Corrections and comments are welcome.

If you found this summary useful, please consider contributing to
the Perl Foundation to help support the development of Perl.
