=head1 This Week on perl5-porters - 1-7 May 2006

Let's change perl's internal hash function, shall we?

=head1 Topics of Interest

=head2 The Win32/Wince leveraged buy-out merger

Vadim reminded the patch-meisters, (and clearly the man has been
revising his classics) to apply the large Win32 patch that
Yves Orton had posted, so that they could continue the process.

  Smelly socks!
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00098.html

Which must have been applied, for a little while later Vadim posted
further tweaks to the Wince side of things.

  One less source file!
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00139.html

As well as some F<Makefile.ce> goodness

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00170.html

=head2 C<state> variables featured in C<blead>

Rafael Garcia-Suarez ironed out some of the bigger show-stoppers
in his state variable work, and was thus able to commit the first
draft to C<blead>. Arrays and hashes aren't done yet, but as of
now, we have an elegant solution to the perennial C<my $var if 0>
problem.

Nicholas Clark was impressed, and tried out a snippet of code, that Rafael
turned into a test for a brand new F<t/op/state.pl>.

  Coup d'état
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00149.html

=head2 Is C<socketpair> available everywhere?

Jan Dubois was looking at the section in C<perlport> where it says that
C<socketpair> is not available on Win32 and a number of other platforms.
He thought that it was currently emulated on all platforms that did not
provide a native implementation. If so, it would mean that the section
could be quietly dropped.

Alex Waugh mentioned that it's available natively on RISC OS, so if
nothing else, that could be removed from the list.

  Going native
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00155.html

=head2 Support for inside-out classes

Anno Siegel delivered a two part patch to improve the implementation of
inside-out classes. Part one deals with perl itself, and the second part
reaches out into the core library and expands C<Hash::Util>. Anno also
provided a demo to show how it worked.

Yves Orton was quite enthusiastic, Randy W. Sims, markedly less. David
Golden had a close look at the patch and explained clearly what he
thought was going on, and pointed out some issues where the implementation
was a bit rough around the edges.

Yuval Kogman thought the patch was maybe not general enough, and
suggested some avenues to explore, other than just Inside-Out
objects. David Golden and Abigail discussed issues such as
backwards compatibility at length.

Rafael announced that he was happy with the intent of the patch.
Nicholas Clark caught an error that Anno set about correcting.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00148.html

Obligingly, Anno summarised where he was going from here with the
patch. In the end he retired the patch and set about doing something
better.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00272.html

  "U" magic in February
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-02/msg00246.html

=head2 Hashing algorithms

Jarkko Hietaniemi was looking at hash functions, and stumbled across a
page full of them. Perl uses the "One-at-a-Time" algorithm. Except that
we don't, although the comments say we do. Except, if you have enough
coffee and look again, we really do.

Yves Orton benchmarked a series of hashing algorithms to see what
they did for perl. At a first glance, it looked like "One-at-a-Time"
was rather slow, especially in comparison to another hashing function
named (surprise!) C<SuperFastHash>.

Much of the improvement is dependent on the length of the hash keys.
Short keys show little difference, long keys can show spectacular
improvements.

Michael Schroeder weighed in with Buzhash, which, at the expense of
a table of 256 C<int>s, boils down to a rotate and xor per character.

  Total Hash Controversy
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00261.html

=head2 Don't kill C<select((select(OUTPUT_HANDLE), $| = 1)[0])>

Abigail made an impassioned plea to keep this tricky construct in
the documentation. The main point being that it would be of use to
maintenance programmers, not necessarily for people starting out.
A few people argued the issue back and forth, and Abigail maintained
that a three line snippet would be preferable, since people
could pick it apart and thus learn more easily about the particular
parts they are unsure of.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00197.html

=head1 Patches of Interest

=head2 threads patches

Jerry D. Hedden sent in a new version of a patch to threads, this
time with much less drastic whitespace reformatting. This time
around it was applied.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00146.html

... and another to add stack size support, which was the main
reason why Jerry started to work on all of this in the first
place. Applied as well.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00188.html

=head2 What Andy Lester did this week

Andy Lester forwarded a patch last week to tidy up one-line loops,
specifically, bringing the lone semi colon down to the next line and using
a C<NOOP> macro. Said macro can then be used to squirrel away the various
comments that use secret handshakes to keep source analysis tools happy.

Rafael hated it. Nicholas Clark proposed a semantically equivalent
alternative that met with the Andy seal of approval, and so Andy
went back to refactor using the new approach.

  It's overkill of course
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00102.html

He came back after a while with new versions of F<doio.c> and F<dump.c> and
wanted to know what people thought of them. Rafael must have liked it, since
he applied the patch.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00110.html

Along with a nice micro-optimisation for C<S_find_array_subscript>.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00114.html

Andy then thought he could remove a C<goto> in a section of code in F<op.c>,
since the only thing it does is jump over a single C<if> block. The concept
was perhaps sufficiently scary for no-one to dare apply it to see what would
happen.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00119.html

=head2 What Jarkko Hietaniemi did this week

Jarkko tweaked C<hv.c> to use a safer approach to performing the
task of zeroing out memory.

  Know your macros
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00106.html

And cast his eyes upon F<pp_sys.c>.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00107.html

And a tweak to shave some memory off the size of a C<microperl>.

  Smaller is better
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00117.html

Jarkko also added some enhancements to the C<PERL_MEM_LOG> infrastructure,
that allows very detailed logging of memory allocations. Jarkko hoped that
someone would feel sufficiently inspired to write some code to munge the
output and produce some pretty pictures to help gather a better understanding
of allocation patterns.

  Your name in lights
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00246.html

=head2 Various F<t/op/*> tests are reviewed

...by yours truly, and patches applied by Rafael.

Historians may find it of interest that the patch to F<context.t>
was the first ever since its inclusion, following a bug report from
François Désarmenien nearly six years ago.

  t/op/context.t
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00134.html

  t/op/grep.t
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00133.html

  t/op/list.t
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00138.html

And in other news, your summariser ran into a minor problem of
resource acquisition (not enough semaphores available) to run
a couple of tests in C<blead>'s suite, and set patches to fix
that up as well.

  ext/IPC/SysV/t/ipcsysv.t
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00230.html

  ext/IPC/SysV/t/sem.t
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00231.html

In doing so, another minor problem arose with C<fold_constants JMPENV_PUSH>
panics. Dave Mitchell sorted this out, but you'll have to wait for next week's
exciting episode to find out how (this is due to a severe warp in the space-time
continuum, in that the summary is I<really> late this week).

  That's not supposed to happen
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00220.html

=head1 Watching the smoke signals

=head2 Smoke [5.9.4] 28069 FAIL(M) MSWin32 WinXP/.Net SP2 (x86/2 cpu)

The recent work done by Yves and Vadim blew away a couple of
assumptions. Sadahiro Tomoyuki identified the source of the problem.
A brief flurry of patches had it fixed up quickly.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00111.html

=head2 Smoke [5.9.4] 28108 FAIL(XM) MSWin32 WinXP/.Net SP2 (x86/2 cpu)

Another problem showed up, this time relating to threads.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00245.html

=head2 Smoke [5.8.8] 28115 FAIL(M) MSWin32 WinXP/.Net SP2 (x86/2 cpu)

And a final one, where perl was built and yet managed to forget to
link in a C<Perl_*> function, because the export list for the linker
had become messed up. Sorted out by Steve Hay and Nicholas Clark.

http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00273.html

=head1 New and old bugs from RT

=head2 Change 22258 causes test failures on AFS (#38698)

A recent change to a F<ext/IO/t/io_unix.t> to permit a fall-back to
F</tmp> if socket creation fails in the current directory causes
grief on AFS file systems. People tried to figure out how to work
around this added twist. Mike Guy wondered it it wouldn't be easier
to figure out first why the socket was failing in the current
directory in the first place, then maybe people wouldn't have to
deal with this new case.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00173.html

=head2 C<rcatline> doesn't stringify references (#39037)

  and maybe it should
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg01103.html

=head2 5.8.8 F<lib/ExtUtils/t> failures (#39055)

pal@hp sent in some patches to make C<ExtUtils> more robust in the face
of super-fast hardware.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00128.html

=head2 C<readline> the last line with no newline (#39060)

Mark Martinec observed that when the last line of a file lacked a newline,
he would observe C<Bad file descriptor> errors, and supplied some code to
show how to reproduce the problem

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00152.html

=head2 C<Data::Dumper> and numeric scalars (#39062)

Brad Baxter noticed that C<Data::Dumper> would sometimes quote a scalar
that would otherwise not need quotes, as it was numeric. Unfortunately,
he wasn't able to pin the change in behaviour down any more accurately
than between 5.6.1 and 5.8.7.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00153.html

=head2 non-portable static libraries on AMD64 Linux (#39068)

This was a problem related to linking with C<-fpic> as opposed to C<-fPIC>.
Debate raged over how to get it sorted out in C<Configure>.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00156.html

=head2 Choosing vendor install paths (#39069)

A similar problem, for which the build infrastructure offers a couple of
alternatives.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00157.html

=head2 Perl locale disagrees with Linux sort (#39087)

When locales are in use, Perl doesn't sort the same way as the GNU sort
program in Linux, nor PostgreSQL Sadahiro Tomoyuki explained that perl
isn't making this stuff up as it goes along, merely using whatever
C's C<strxfrm> function cares to return.

  So what are the others using?
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00242.html

=head2 Overloading Regexp and infinite recursion => SEGV (#39090)

Andreas Koenig showed how overloading C<""> and adding a dash of
C<qr//> into the mix can produce a core dump. 

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00247.html

=head2 deprecated C<$#> treats 0 specially (#39097)

Ruud Affijn showed what strange and wonderful things can happen
when you embed a newline in the C<#$> variable. Which you shouldn't
be doing anyway as its usage is deprecated after all. Andy
Dougherty traced the behaviour all the way back to perl 1.010.

  Good novelty value
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00281.html

=head2 C<Pod::Html> error stops CPAN install/test of C<Pod::Readme> (#39098)

This bug highlighted the issue of what to do when installing a POD
file as a man page, and the POD is malformed. Should the file be
skipped? Should the installation be aborted?

  Halt and Catch Fire
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00282.html

=head2 Perl5 Bug Summary

  14 opened + 18 closed = 1523
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00289.html

=head1 New Core Modules

=over 8

=item *

Encode version 2.16 was released by Dan Kogai.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00142.html

=back

=head1 In Brief

Peter Dintelmann followed up on the thread last week about B<length
specifiers in C<unpack>>'s mini-language and came up with a documentation
patch, first for C<maint>, and then for B<blead>.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00168.html

Since B<C<${^WIN32_SLOPPY_STAT}> is in C<blead>>, Rafael called for
some documentation, to explain what it does. Jan Dubois complied.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00090.html

By the same token, Jan also B<clarified hard link support on Windows>.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00141.html

Mohammad Yaseen had some B<problems building Perl modules> in non-standard
locations. There was the usual chorus of advice about C<PREFIX> and
C<PERL5LIB> but B<the really interesting news> from the thread was that
Randy W. Sims mentioned that Module::Build now (as in 0.28) supports
C<ExtUtils::MakeMaker>'s C<PREFIX> functionality.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00092.html

Things seemed to be moving along for Mohammad. After having
successfully built B<perl on z/OS>, he was having trouble B<dealing with
the semantics of environment variables>. Dominic Dunlop guided him
through the minefield.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00118.html

Dominic requested more information about B<Perl on Windows 98>.
Even the original poster thought that it probably wasn't worth the effort
to pursue any further.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00135.html

A few more data points on the issue of B<C<taint> and C<fork> on Win32>,
courtesy Perlmonks.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00178.html

Paul Johnson returned to Adam Kennedy's question about B<how to tell whether
a file handle is seekable>, as he had run into pretty much the same issue
with C<IO::Compress:Zip>. In the end he simply documented that trying to
do X with Y just does not work.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00085.html

Shlomi Fish found B<a Heisenbug with C<perl -d>>. Dave Mitchell confirmed
that it is fixed in C<blead>. Andreas Koenig confirmed that it was fixed
with a Heisenpatch.

  Now you see it. Umm...
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00236.html

Ash Berlin spotted a couple of places in F<perlop.pod> with B<incorrect C<LE<lt>...E<gt>>
markup>.

  Try writing the above sentence in POD yourself
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00249.html

Nicholas Clark discovered that GCC does not conform to the C standard, section
6.8.6.4. Marcus Holland-Moritz comforted him with the idea the Intel compiler
gets it wrong too.

  A void hate
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00275.html

=head2 About this summary

This summary was written by David Landgren. My humble apologies for
the tardiness, Real Life kept me busy this week.

If you want a bookmarklet approach to viewing bugs and change reports,
there are a couple of bookmarklets that you might find useful on
my page of Perl stuff:

  http://www.landgren.net/perl/

Weekly summaries are published on F<http://use.perl.org/> and posted
on a mailing list, (subscription: F<perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org>).
The archive is at F<http://dev.perl.org/perl5/list-summaries/>.
Corrections and comments are welcome.

If you found this summary useful or enjoyable, please consider
contributing to the Perl Foundation to help support the development
of Perl.
