=head1 This Week on perl5-porters - 20-26 March 2006

Dave Mitchell converts the regular expression engine from
recursive to iterative.

=head1 Topics of Interest

=head2 More on C<Module::Build> on VMS

Ken Williams got back to Craig A. Berry's patch from last week for
C<Module::Build> on VMS, and implemented a new approach to deal
with backtick captures. John E. Malmberg and Craig batted it around
for a while until it looked ready. John wrapped it up as a new version
of C<ExtUtils::CBuilder>. John noted that there might be issues with
older VMS versions that limit command lines to 255 characters, but
decided to punt the issue for the time being.

  Looking good
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-03/msg00795.html

=head2 Building a threads-friendly debugger.

Dean Arnold wrote to say that he was in the process of hacking C<ptkdb>
to make it easier to deal with debugging multi-threaded programs. He
had reached the point where it seemed that the most promising way
forward was to change the C<$DB::single> variable to be globally
shared across all the threads.

After the usual admonishments ("You're mad!", "No-one who has ventured
there has ever come back alive!"), Dave Mitchell said that he thought
that it couldn't do much harm, except that it was likely to bring about
a significant loss in performance, as the threads fought amongst
themselves to acquire a lock on C<$DB::single> to read it.

Dean ran a couple of benchmarks and saw that Dave was right, the
resulting performance curve was pretty atrocious (about two orders
of magnitude).

  Where hackers fear to tread
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-03/msg00703.html

=head2 Dynamic libraries on AIX 5.1

Last time we heard from John L. Allen, he had been busy doing battle
with 32/64 bit builds with Oracle on AIX. This week he was having
trouble with C<Math::Pari>, and he and Ilya Zakharevich, C<Math::Pari>'s
author, were stuck.

The problem revolved around which libraries were being linked, which
meant that the wrong version of the C language C<pow> function being
used.  John wanted to understand what was happening and why. H.Merijn
Brand guided him through the twisty mazes of AIX linker techniques.

By the end of the thread John had managed to concoct a method for
making it work, and H.Merijn made a plea for an AIX maven
to step in and take over (and revise) the F<README.aix> file.

  Fear and loathing
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-03/msg00645.html

=head2 New C<Time::Local> failure

Rafael Garcia-Suarez attempted to upgrade C<blead> with C<Time::Local>
version 1.12, and saw that the test suite failed. Steve Hay recalled
that this was the result of a bug that he had encountered in LWP's test
suite. Gisle Aas isolated the problem with C<Time::Local>, and Dave
Mitchell came up with the patch.

Steve wondered whether that patch should be applied only to the
Win32 platform. Dave Rolsky, author of the module, responded saying
that there were some problems with integer overflow that gets
triggered only in certain time zones. He said that it was all a bit
of a mess, but that he was going to get it sorted out and release
1.13.

  It's about time
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-03/msg00734.html

=head2 Revamped UTF-8 caching code

Nicholas Clark checked in some code to rework how UTF-8 caching is
performed.

First, some background: finding the offset of an arbitrary character
in a UTF-8 string can be a difficult proposition, depending on the
number of wide characters encountered in the string. The brute force
method consists of starting from the beginning, and then counting
characters until the desired offset is reached. Depending on the
length of the string, this can be very time-consuming.

To lessen this cost, perl maintains a cache of where wide characters
appear in a string, to minimise the amount of linear scanning
required. A few weeks ago, a bug report revealed that there were
some problems with the existing cache management code.

So Nicholas reworked it a fair bit, adding a C<${^UTF8CACHE}>
variable to allow the caching code to be enabled and disabled at
will, as well as a C<PERL_UTF8_CACHE_ASSERT> build-time
switch to force extra checking (verifying that the cached and
uncached results agree). He also discovered that the code wasn't
taking full benefit of the gathered information, and
tweaked the code to minimise the amount of linear scanning
required.

  And accessible from the command-line too
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-03/msg00745.html

  see also
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-02/msg00864.html

=head2 The regexp engine no longer uses recursion

Dave Mitchell announced that he had reworked the regular expression
engine to use an iterative technique rather than recursive. He
achieved this feat by making C<S_regmatch()> save its match context
on the heap and restart the main loop, rather than on the stack
by calling itself.

Dave measured that the heap allocation induced a 3% slowdown, but that
this should be avoided by switching to an arena-based allocation scheme
or similar, further down the track.

Before you ask, yes, C</(??{$re}/)> still causes recursion. And Hugo
van der Sanden thinks undoing I<that> would be hard.

  No more nasty stack overflow bugs
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-03/msg00793.html

=head1 Patches of Interest

=head2 Upgrading to C<threads> version 1.12

Jerry Hedden had delivered a patch to sync C<blead> with C<CPAN>. Dave
Mitchell declined the patch, saying that a patch must never mix functionality
and whitespace formatting changes. If the whitespace is to be changed
(and in general the rule is: never), then that should be delivered in
a separate patch.

Dave also thought that the approach was back to front. The changes
should be applied to C<blead> first, and then after the changes have
had time to settle, the C<blead> version can be released to C<CPAN>.

Jan Dubois agreed that he too would prefer it this way around, since
each change is tracked in Perforce, the C<perl5-changes> mailing list
gets to hear about it, and e-mail C<Message-ID>s from the latter
list make it easier to cross-reference the changes with traffic on
C<perl5-porters>.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-03/msg00651.html

Jerry also asked about the definition of C<THREAD_RET_TYPE>, in
the process of coming to grips with the C<threads> code base but
received no answers.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-03/msg00749.html

and finally got a patch accepted to sync C<blead> with CPAN.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-03/msg00750.html

=head2 Serialising closures via C<Storable>

David Wheeler wanted to know whether C<Storable> could be used
to dump out a closure, bring it back again, and have it work. For
instance, to be able to say

  my $var = 1;
  my $code = sub { $var };
  print $code->();
  $code = thaw(freeze($code));
  print $code->();

And have it print out "1" twice, rather than once and a warning
about uninitialised values in C<print>. Yuval Kogman explained how
it was more or less possible, and the pitfalls one would encounter
if one were brave enough to insist on the approach.

Yves Orton, author of C<Data::Dump::Streamer>. showed how using that
module could probably provide something closer to what David was
after. Joshua realised that one only had to teach C<Storable>
to use C<DDS> instead of C<B::Deparse> and it would Just Work.

Rafael noted that Storable is in the core, but C<DDS> is not, although
it should be possible to teach C<Storable> to use it if it were
available locally.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-03/msg00763.html

=head1 Watching the smoke signals

=head2 F<Compress/IO/Zlib/t/050interop-gzip.t> failure on OpenBSD

Steve Peters tracked down the smoke failures occurring on OpenBSD. It
turns out that OpenBSD's C<gzip> behaves differently when gzipping
a zero-byte file:

  # Cygwin, FreeBSD, Linux, NetBSD, Solaris, ...
  touch /tmp/foo; gzip -c /tmp/foo > /tmp/foo.gz; echo $?
  0
  # OpenBSD
  touch /tmp/foo; gzip -c /tmp/foo > /tmp/foo.gz; echo $?
  1

Paul took that into account, but wondered all the same why the
smoke results mentioned "Inconsistent test results (between TEST and harness)",
when one should expect that both TEST and harness should fail in exactly
the same way.

Steve had a hunch that the problem on OpenBSD arose when the file
to be compressed is less than 10 bytes long. Which seems odd, to say
the least. Joshua ben Jore mentioned that he had seen similar problems
on a Ubuntu Linux but hadn't been paying close attention. He promised
to go back and look more closely to see if it was the same error, or
something else again.

  One more reason...
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-03/msg00636.html

  And the patch to fix it
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-03/msg00785.html
 

=head2 Smoke [5.9.4] 27593 FAIL(F) MSWin32 WinXP/.Net SP2 (x86/2 cpu)

Steve Hay had a Windows build fail due to a problem with
C<ExtUtils::MakeMaker> (that Rafael had recently integrated), and
asked Michael to integrate the patch he made into the C<EU::MM>
repository.

  Earth to Schwern, do you read me?
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-03/msg00782.html

=head1 New and old bugs from RT

=head2 C<print (...) interpreted as function> occasionally (#4346)

Many moons ago, Abigail reported that the message "print (...)
interpreted as function" appears inconsistently, depending on
a peculiar combination of closing braces, whitespace and/or
semicolons. Steve Peters said that C<say> has picked up a
similar habit.

  The more things change...
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-03/msg00663.html

=head2 More on overloading and reblessing (#34925)

The thread about overloading and reblessing objects continued this
week. Nicholas Clark proposed a solution to scan all the references
to an object and fix them up. Yitzchak Scott-Thoennes pointed out
that such an approach would break the following code:

  $a = $b = {};
  bless $b, OverloadedClass;
  # $a is not overloaded here

Yitzchak admitted that such a construct would probably be quite
rare, and wondered whether it wouldn't be better simply to document
the fact that the initial example doesn't work, with suggested
work-arounds. Nicholas implemented the scan approach in C<maint>
as change #27512.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-03/msg00830.html

=head2 B::Lint chokes on simple script (#38771)

Bart Lateur filed a bug report against C<B::Lint> (on perl 5.8.7). The
interesting thing is that the program in question was

  print for 1 .. 10

Joshua ben Jore, who has recently put a fair amount of work into
the C<B::> namespace observed that the problem has been fixed in
C<blead>, but that it probably still exists in 5.8.8.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-03/msg00654.html

=head2 C<NaN>s on Win32 (#38779)

Rob a.k.a Sisyphus posted a bug report concerning C<NaN>s (Not a Number)
on Win32. It seems that there is a compiler issue, which is that code
compiled with VC7 is correct, but VC6 is not.

Dominic Dunlop noted sadly that the best way to fix this bug would be to
add a note to the F<README.win32> documentation to say that perl should
not be built with VC6. There's an article on the MSDN site that goes into
more detail about floating point comparison issues.

Yves Orton thought that that was hardly ideal, since VC6 has always been
the standard compiler that ActiveState uses for their builds. Except that
Dominic was talking about Microsoft's freely downloadable compiler, which,
is apparently a slightly different beast.

Jan Dubois came up with the best patch, one that works around
compilers that have brain-damaged C<NaN> comparison routines. Looking
more closely at the code, Jan realised that perl's handing C<NaN>
handling is somewhat uneven. C<grok_number()> will set the
C<IS_NUMBER_NAN> and C<IS_NUMBER_INFINITY> bits as appropriate, but
C<sv_2nv()> doesn't bother to check them; it ducks the issue
and lets C<atof()> deal with it. He also saw that the F<cmp.t> test
that tests how C<< <=> >> deals with C<NaN>s is probably not doing
anything meaningful.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-03/msg00686.html

In a thread-split elsewhere on the same topic, Jan provided keen
insight into the subject of C run-time libraries on Windows.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-03/msg00715.html

=head2 Constants with C<undef> value deliver arbitrary value at first call (#38783)

Markus Herber posted a bug report dealing with the XS code of C<IO-Tty>
that creates constant subroutine with C<undef> as a value. Nicholas Clark
understood what was going wrong and promptly supplied a patch which
solved the problem. The patch is a bit of a stop-gap measure, but it
will do for now.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-03/msg00689.html

=head2 Deep hash of hashes breaks garbage collector (#38786)

Reto Stamm uncovered a lovely bug in the garbage collector. He posted
a program (paraphrased for succinctness here):

  my $root = {};
  my $h = $root;
  $h->{kid} = {} and $h = $h->{kid} for 1..250000

This runs just fine, until the program exits, the garbage collector is
run, the garbage collector exhausts the C stack due to recursion and
the program goes belly up with a segmentation fault.

chromatic thought that simply rewriting C<S_hfreeentries>, C<Perl_hv_undef>,
C<Perl_sv_clear>, C<Perl_sv_free2>, and C<Perl_hv_free_ent> for good
measure to use iteration instead of recursion would probably do the trick.

  *crickets chirping*
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-03/msg00716.html

=head2 C<Fatal> doesn't like C<readdir()> (#38790)

Tom Hukins filed a report that showed that C<readdir> breaks when
C<Fatal> is used. (C<Fatal> upgrades warnings to to fatal errors).

The trouble is that C<Fatal> gets mixed up between scalar and list
context (doesn't everyone?) and throws all the results away. Rafael
thought that a judiciously placed C<wantarray> would solve that,
but that in turn would alter the behaviour of something as admittedly
bizarre as

  my @useless = open my $fh, 'does.not.exist';

Yitzchak suggested hunting down the exceptions (C<select> also seemed
to be a likely candidate) and document their limitations in conjunction
with C<Fatal>. Joshua thought that this was less than ideal. If
someone was going to go to the effort of hunting down all of weird
special-context builtins to document them (and there aren't a whole
lot), it would take about as much effort to code C<Fatal> to make
it do The Right Thing all the time.

Rafael agreed, and kept looking at his inbox for the patch. Joshua
mumbled something about some patches to C<B::Lint> he was working
on, and promised to do something about this first.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-03/msg00735.html

Joshua went looking at C<Fatal>, and stumbled across some C<AUTOLOAD>
code, and wondered if and how it was used. Mark Jason Dominus suggested
that its purpose was to allow the construct

  use Fatal;
  Fatal::open();

to work in the same manner as

  use Fatal 'open';
  open();

Which is either pretty slick, or pretty sick.

  Nice to know
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-03/msg00786.html

=head2 Perl5 Bug Summary

  1560 open tickets
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-03/msg00673.html

  Right here
  http://rt.perl.org/rt3/NoAuth/perl5/Overview.html

=head1 In Brief

Dave Mitchell reminded us that B<C<our> variables and package variables>
are compiled to the same code internally and as such B<have identical
performance characteristics>.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-03/msg00643.html

Philip M. Gollucci reported a bug that manifests itself using
B<C<mod_perl> on FreeBSD>. Apparently another one of those "this
is the second time it's broken" bugs. Robin Barker and Gisle
Aas committed a couple of patches, including adding a check
in the test suite, so hopefully we won't see the likes of it
again.

  Perl_croak and nullch
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-03/msg00655.html

Jim Cromie reported that C<bleadperl> was uncompilable, due to
problems with C<Dynaloader> failing. Rafael traced it to the
fact that he was integrating CPAN's C<ExtUtils::MakeMaker> 6.30_01
into C<blead>, and its handling of C<MAN3PODS> was broken. So
he fixed that, and C<bleadperl> started compiling again.

  Safe to go back in the water
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-03/msg00769.html

Dan Kogai found an anomaly whilst B<playing with C<YAML::Syck>> and
developed an detailed hypothesis as to what was going wrong. As
of summary publishing time, no comments had been made.

  How to mangle the SvTYPEs on arrays and hashes
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-03/msg00773.html

Someone asked how to use Perl to run Visual Basic code and
was directed to Perlmonks.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-03/msg00792.html

=head2 About this summary

This summary was written by David Landgren.

Information concerning bugs referenced in this summary (as #nnnnn)
may be viewed at http://rt.perl.org/rt3/Ticket/Display.html?id=nnnnn

Information concerning patches to C<maint> or C<blead> referenced in
this summary (as #nnnnn) may be viewed at
http://public.activestate.com/cgi-bin/perlbrowse?patch=nnnnn

If you want a bookmarklet approach to viewing bugs and change reports,
there are a couple of bookmarklets that you might find useful on
my page of Perl stuff:

  http://www.landgren.net/perl/

Weekly summaries are published on F<http://use.perl.org/> and posted
on a mailing list, (subscription: F<perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org>).
The archive is at F<http://dev.perl.org/perl5/list-summaries/>.
Corrections and comments are welcome.

If you found this summary useful or enjoyable, please consider
contributing to the Perl Foundation to help support the development
of Perl.
