=head1 This Week on perl5-porters - 5-11 June 2006

Perl has always been very good about builds. Lets me spend my time
fighting other software issues. -- Alan Olsen

=head1 Topics of Interest

=head2 Using C<#ifdef> inside a macro

Discussion continued on this issue affecting F<mg.c>. The essence
of the problem was a simple issue of the character used for separating
paths (such as C</> on Unix). Andy Dougherty suggested a way to
solve the problem upstream, at configure time. John E. Malmberg,
ever the devil's advocate, pointed out that this would be unlikely
to fly on VMS, since the path separator could either be C<|>,
C<:> or perhaps something else again, depending on from which shell
perl was being run.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00079.html

=head2 Failing 0.9% of the time

Jerry D. Hedden traced a random random thread test failure down to
a problem that was a variant on the birthday party paradox: put
twenty people in a room, and there's a better than even chance that
two people share the same birthday. In a similar vein, the tests
would fail if a random number was generated twice.

The original issue was that all threads of a program would generate
the same sequence of random numbers, which is contrary to many
people's ideas of randomness. This has since been fixed, albeit with
the above side effect in the test suite. Jerry applied a quick fix
to bring the statistical likelihood of bogus failures from 0.9%
down to 0.003% by allowing one duplicate to occur.

Paul Johnson thought that accepting two or three duplicates would
ensure that the testing showed that the fix continued to work,
while pushing the threshold of failure down into the noise. Jerry
thought of another approach that would be even better still, but
considered that this current fix was good enough. Rafael Garcia-Suarez
applied the patch in any event.

  Heads or tails
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00086.html

=head2 UTF-8 testing black smoke

A recent change (#28528 - abolishing C<cop_io>) has caused lots of
black smoke to issue forth from the smoke boxes. Nicholas Clark
cleaned up a number of problems, but he wasn't sure what the best
way was to correct a couple of the remaining failures.

Sadahiro Tomoyuki suggested one way. The problem is still unsolved.
It boils down to a question that anyone with a bit of Perl
knowledge could solve: how to tell the test harness that two
different outputs can be valid, expected output.

  Over to you, dear reader
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00090.html

=head2 Compiling C<mod_perl> on Suse Linux 10.1

Torsten Foertsch was having great difficulty dealing with the
C<#define>s and C<#ifdef>s in F<perl.h> and was unable to compile C<mod_perl>.
The problem was figuring out what macros expanded into, and whether one
could typecast the macros and have it work as expected. Apparently not,
because on some platforms, the macro expands into C code that looks like
C<if(1) ...>.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00102.html

=head2 C<dor> I<versus> C<err>

Rafael has been using the new defined-or operator in C<blead>, and
noticed that he kept writing C<use feature 'dor'> instead of
C<use feature 'err'>. After a while he grew tired of this, and
added C<dor> as an alias for C<err>.

  It's not dorky
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00114.html

=head2 Action queues as an action item

David Nicol wanted to know whether his people were interested in
pursuing his idea of a queue-based
mechanism for dealing with signal management and possibly other
stuff.

Nicholas ruled out any changes to the signal code in the
maintenance branch. He also remarked that there might be a race
condition between one thread receiving a signal, and another
thread draining the queue, since, when a signal is received,
there not enough context to determine which interpreter should
handle it. And it would be very hard to solve this in a
portable manner.

David maintained that none of the problems were insurmountable.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00121.html

=head2 Losing signals

Nicholas took a closer look at the existing signals code, and
identified what he thought was the source of the allegations of
lost signals: a section of code lacking a mutex.

  That's me in the spotlight
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00320.html

=head2 Is Perl's C<bsearch> bug free?

Dan Kogai wanted to know if Perl was not subject to the binary
search bug found by Joshua Bloch, who works at Google. The problem
is that a binary search works in part by taking the mid-point of a
high and low value, where the values are indices into the table
being searched.

This has usually been performed until now by adding the two values together
and dividing by two. There is a problem if the two values overflow
the maximum integer size, which happens when you have about a billion
elements in an array. This is becoming more and more frequent as
machines become deeper and faster.

Andy Dougherty confirmed that perl's Quicksort implementation as
it stands does have this problem. The fix is probably, as Joshua
suggests, to take the difference of the two values, divide that
by two, and add that to the low value. Nonetheless, a lot of
thought should be put into exploring the boundary cases (and
and even values, odd and even array sizes and so on) to make sure
nothing breaks.

Jan Dubois reminded people that even on 64-bit perls, the C<av_*>
API uses C<I32> for indices. But changing that causes a huge
ripple through the code base...

  Sooner or later
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00126.html

  Joshua Bloch's blog post
  http://xrl.us/ne99

=head2 C<dlopen()> not found

David Wheeler posted an innocuous call for help to get Perl compiled
on a 64-bit Red Hat platform. It turned out that C<Configure> lacked
the necessary smarts to figure out what library paths should be used.

Then followed a rather long discussion about Red Hat C<spec> files,
the evils of 32- and 64-bit applications residing on the same box,
the extent to which which Linux distributors backported security
patches to older Perls and so on.

  Looking for libs in all the wrong places
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00190.html

=head2 The range operator (C<..>) I<versus> Unicode

Dan Kogai ruefully discovered that C<..> doesn't work with Unicode.
For instance, C<('a'..'z')> produces all the letters of the (ASCII)
alphabet, but the same cannot be said of C<("\N{GREEK CAPITAL LETTER
ALPHA}" .. "\N{GREEK CAPITAL LETTER OMEGA}")>.

Even more surprising, though, was the fact that a simple work-around,
by way of a C<map {chr}>, was all that was needed to make things
work.

Yitzchak Scott-Thoennes connected this issue to the definition of
the magic auto-increment operator and the fact that it is not geared
to dealing with this new-fangled Unicode stuff.

  $s = 'a';
  $s++; # now 'b'

Dan was unhappily willing to accept that one could not create Unicode
ranges, in which case the documentation should be amended to spell
this out clearly. On the other hand, he was even more unhappy by
the fact that in regular expressions and transliterations, Unicode
ranges do work.

Rafael entertained the idea of prolonging the magic to allow:

  $s = "\N{omega}";
  $s++; # now "\N{alpha}\N{alpha}"

but thought that the results might prove to be entertaining in all
sorts of unforeseen ways.

Sadahiro Tomoyuki reminded people to very careful when dealing with
Greek letters, such as final sigma between rho and sigma, and that
stigma or digamma aren't treated as following epsilon. Or the
opposite, I'm not sure.

  It's all greek to me
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00194.html

=head1 Patches of Interest

=head2 A better Aho-Corasick, and lots of benchmarks

Yves Orton sent in a new, improved patch for adding the Aho-Corasick
pattern matching algorithm to the regular expression engine. He
also bundled a F<perl_bench.pl> program that he had developed to
benchmark multiple Perl versions.

Yves thought that some of the observed slowdown in 5.9.4 might be
due to Dave Mitchell's work in eliminating recursion from the engine.
Nonetheless, he was optimistic about the situation, saying that
there is a lot of room for improvements, and was targeting being
at least as fast as 5.6.1.

In a followup, he rejigged the code and had the performance running
faster than Python (not that we're competing or anything).

Yves develops on Windows, using MSVC as his main compiler, and as
such, unwittingly used some MSVC-isms that gave C<gcc> and other
compilers indigestions. Other porters came to the rescue and
straightened it all out.

  /n[iiiiii]ce/
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00101.html

Andy Lester tossed in some cleanups to F<regexec.c> and F<regcomp.c>.
Yves took them onboard, along with an observation from Nicholas that
showed that the patch disagreed with threads, and produced a new
version.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00317.html

Yves also tidied up and shipped out a more current version of a
pluggable 5.10 regexp engine for 5.8.1.

  Overhaul
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00327.html

=head2 Onwards, C<const>ing soldier

Andy Lester delivered a patch for F<toke.c> that added a range of
assorted goodnesses.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00097.html

and more accumulated cleanups in files too numerous (well, four) to mention,

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00098.html

which prompted Nicholas to make a few remarks about C<int>s and pointer
sizes and so forth.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00150.html

Moving right along, Andy added some home-grown C<const>ing to F<dump.c>,

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00118.html

and silenced a couple of C<signed>/C<unsigned> warnings in F<toke.c>
and F<op.c>. Not applied, apparently.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00166.html

Andy wrapped up with a tidying of C<sv_dup> in F<sv.c>. It looked big
and scary, but Rafael fearlessly applied it anyway.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00269.html

=head2 Tidying C<PL_cshname> and C<PL_sh_path>

Jan Dubois tweaked to code to deal with the problem of installing a Perl
distribution on a system that has only C</sbin/sh> and not C</bin/sh>,
and refactored the code that deals with C<exec> failures, regardless of
the shell (C<sh> or C<csh>) used.

  Hide in your shell
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00185.html

=head1 Watching the smoke signals

A number of smokes elicited a certain amount of comment:

  Smoke [5.9.4] 28368 FAIL(XF) linux 2.6.15-23-386 [debian] (i686/1 cpu)
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00192.html

  Smoke [5.9.4] 28372 FAIL(F) linux 2.6.15-23-386 [debian] (i686/1 cpu)
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00271.html

  Smoke [5.8.8] 28233 FAIL(F) MSWin32 WinXP/.Net SP2 (x86/2 cpu)
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00305.html

And time is not what I have on my side to go any further.

=head1 New and old bugs from RT

=head2 C<perlop>: mention why C<print !!0> doesn't (#33765)

Steve Peters and Dave Mitchell kicked the tyres on this bug,
deciding that what was needed was a paragraph that explained
what values boolean operations return.

  A call to quills
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00302.html

=head2 More leaks à la C<eval "sub { \$foo = 22 "> (#37231)

Nicholas Clark dared to defy Dave Mitchell with yet another way of
producing an C<eval> leak. Dave went medieval on him, and then just
as it was getting exciting, vanished into the big room with the
blue ceiling. While Dave wasn't looking, Nicholas shook out a few
more weird cases when warnings are made fatal.

  King leer
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00093.html

=head2 C<defined>-ness of substrings disappear over repeated calls (#39247)

Rafael had been close paying attention to what Sadahiro Tomoyuki
had said about bugs and patches in C<blead> and C<maint> that dealt
with substrings losing their C<defined>-ness, for he reverted the
change that a) broke this language feature and b) was no longer
necessary anyway.

  Same as it ever was
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00180.html

=head2 Regexp match fails on empty pattern (#39339)

This innocuous bug report attracted a surprising amount of comment,
on the subtlety of C</ />, C<//>, C<''> and C<' '>, and how these
all do slightly different things to C<split>, on how to deal with
warnings, C<usesitecustomize> and more besides. In the end, Ronald
Fischer asked for the report to be closed, and that was the end of
that.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00210.html

=head2 C<sort> with custom subname and prototype C<($$)> segfaults intermittently (#39358)

This appeared to be a curious bug on the surface, dealing as it
did with doubly-indirected arrays. H.Merijn Brand noted that this
no longer dumped core in C<blead>, instead contenting itself to
bail out with a cryptic C<Bizarre copy of UNKNOWN in aelem>.

Graham Barr was the first to realise that the reason was due to
the fact an in-place sort was being performed, and assigning the
results to another array made it work. Salvador Fandiño then
correctly identified the optimisation that was causing things to
go wrong: you cannot refer to the contents of the array within
the comparator during an in-place sort.

Dave Mitchell saw how to fix it, and said he would do so when he
had a few spare moments.

  Out of sorts
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00276.html

=head2 Bug in F<toke.c> (eval in subst) (#39365)

B. Carter discovered that C<s//#/e> does slightly naughty things in 5.8.0,
and apparently it still behaves the same way in C<blead>.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00280.html

=head2 Perl5 Bug Summary

  7 open, 7 closed, stable at 1488
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00081.html

  Pick a winner
  http://rt.perl.org/rt3/NoAuth/perl5/Overview.html

=head1 New Core Modules

=over 4

=item *

Test-Harness version 2.62 was released by Andy Lester.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00261.html

=item *

Version 0.64 of C<version> was released by John Peacock.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00266.html

=item *

Sys-Syslog version 0.15 was release by Sébastien Aperghis-Tramoni.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00321.html

=back

=head1 In Brief

Rafael made B<C<IPC::Open3> call C<POSIX::_exit> upon C<exec> failures>. (Bug #39252).

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00078.html

The thread concerning B<Perl C<make> failures on HP-UX> went on for far
longer than anyone expected. (Bug #39269)

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00063.html

Lee Goddard was having B<trouble installing C<LWP>> and was directed
to the appropriate forum. (Bug #39334).

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00209.html

Jarkko Hietaniemi declaimed that in F<regcomp.c>, B<thou shalt not
index with C<char> (since that can be C<signed> or C<unsigned>)>.
The thread degenerated into reminiscences of ye olde computers I
have known and loved, before veering into C<alt.kinky.bizarre>.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00065.html

Russ Allbery had not quite finished his quest to B<deal with quotes>,
both single and double, escaped or not, in C<< CE<lt>E<gt> >> sections and
elsewhere.

  The great escape
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00067.html

Rafael suggested that the question about B<C<Pod::Usage>'s usage of C<$0>>
could be side-stepped, choosing efficiency over accuracy.

  A sly escape
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00072.html

Jerry D. Hedden tidied up C<threads> a bit more, dealing with B<HP-UX
10.20's non-standard C<pthread_attr_getstacksize>> and dealing with
the B<absence of C<threads::shared>> during testing.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00082.html

Joshua ben Jore wondered if B<F<op/stat.t> failures on an NFS-mounted directory>
could be attributed to slight clock differences between the local and remote
machines. Rafael recalled having encountered similar issues in the past.

  This is the hour
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00087.html

Steve Peters B<taught C<Configure> that C<icc> is not C<gcc>>.

  The drama unfolds
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00119.html

Peter Scott noticed an odd limitation in F<charnames.pm> that caused
B<named escapes in C<eval> to fail>. Rafael removed it in C<blead>.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00149.html

Yitzchak Scott-Thoennes fixed C<blead> so that B<exhausting
C<< E<lt>E<gt> >> in C<BEGIN>> no longer causes an B<C<ARGVOUT> used
only once> warning.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00139.html

Mohammad Yaseen continued his quest on building stuff on IBM big
iron. He now has a 5.8.7 up and running, but was having trouble
getting B<the test suite for C<OS390-Stdio-0.008> to run> cleanly.
Robert Zielazinski, who has years of experience with MVS pointed
to a couple of gotchas that Yaseen should be aware of.

  Man Versus System
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00151.html

He also learnt all about B<C<%SVf> in perl>, what it does, and why
you would want to.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00281.html

Anno Siegel delivered a new iteration of B<support for inside-out classes>.
Abigail queried a point of nomenclature.

  Making a hash of it
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00153.html

Nicholas Clark showed how to get B<C<Math-Pari> compiling again
under C<blead>>.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00268.html

Ferdinand Bolhar-Nordenkampf offered a number of B<suggestions for
enhancements>, that the porters duly considered.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00296.html

Jarkko suggested B<turning the C<PL_perlio_fd_refcnt> into an C<HV>>.
Dave Mitchell thought that things were already too complicated.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00299.html

=head2 About this summary

This overdue summary was written by David Landgren.

Last week's summary, here:

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00262.html

was carefully read by Dr. Ruud, who was kind enough to point to a
webbed version of a C<c.l.p.m> thread discussing Unicode matters
that I mentioned I was not was not able to access, where, it appears
that "It seems that utf8 extends the core perl parser in some
interesting ways."

Sadahiro Tomoyuki explained what was going on, and Dr. Ruud started
to look through the other C<encoding> bugs to see if they were
manifestations of a related cause. Tomoyuki pointed out yet another
bizarre Unicode inconsistency, dealing with Unicode-encoded
variable names.

If you want a bookmarklet approach to viewing bugs and change
reports, there are a couple of bookmarklets that you might find
useful on my page of Perl stuff:

  http://www.landgren.net/perl/

Weekly summaries are published on F<http://use.perl.org/> and posted
on a mailing list, (subscription: F<perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org>).
The archive is at F<http://dev.perl.org/perl5/list-summaries/>.
Corrections and comments are welcome.

If you found this summary useful, please consider contributing to
the Perl Foundation to help support the development of Perl.
