=head1 This Week on perl5-porters - 17-23 April 2006

=head1 Topics of Interest

=head2 Redoing the regular expression API

Yitzchak Scott-Thoennes suggested that Yves Orton send in a patch
to pull out some of the ancillary functions in C<Data::Dump::Streamer>
in order to make them available in the core distribution.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00579.html

So Yves did just that. The first addition is to add C<reftype_name()>, that
behaves like C<reftype> except that it returns false rather than C<undef>
on non-references. This removes the need for fussy make-work code on the
client side to avoid warnings.

The second addition is a C<regex()> function, which makes it easier to
deal with patterns, whether they have been blessed into other namespaces
or not.

Graham Barr admitted that the return value of C<reftype()> was a mistake,
and C<reftype_name()> was acceptable, but felt that the C<regex()>
function was better off in the C<Regexp> module.

Yves didn't like the fact that C<Scalar::Util::reftype> returns C<SCALAR>
instead of something like C<REGEX>. Nick Ing-Simmons liked the idea, but
thought that it was too dangerous for C<maint>.

Another sub-thread in the discussion revolved around whether a qr//
thing is an object or a type. It is, in fact, an object, but Yves argued
that it is much more useful to treat it as a type. Graham agreed to
disagree.

Adam Kennedy admitted to using C<Regexp>s as objects quite a bit and
would be happy to see the C<Regexp> module receive a dose of
spring-cleaning (which I suppose means fixing up the reblessing
inconsistency that Yves was getting at).

Another hassle Yves pointed out was the non-reversibility of
stringifying regexps:

  my $qr=qr/foo/;
  my $str="$qr";
  print qr/$str/; # equivalent but not equal

Dave Mitchell pointed out that a regular expression currently I<is>
a scalar, it just happens to have a bit of magic attached...

  Shouldering the weight of history
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00703.html

=head2 Silly regexp tricks

Hugo van der Sanden returned to the super-linear cache bug (a C<||>
logical or instead of a C<|> bitwise or) in the regular expression
engine, and came up with a suitable test case:

  ("a" x 31) =~ /^(a*?)(?!(a{6}|a{5})*$)/;
  print length($1);

This prompted Yitzchak Scott-Thoennes to come up with another bug
that showed how C<blead> broke existing behaviour. Since no-one
should ever have come to rely on this behaviour, it was all quietly
swept under the rug. Dave Mitchell hinted that he was working on
New Stuff in the engine.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00587.html

=head2 Bringing C<threads> into the third millenium

Jerry D. Hedden continued to send patches to sync CPAN's C<thread>s with
C<blead>, first by removing a superfluous counter.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00577.html

  and again
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00674.html

  and reworked the threads destruct call
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00780.html

He vented his frustration at the slow pace with which the patches
were getting applied, believing that he was playing by the rules
as much as possible. Rafael was very apologetic, explaining that
he understands so little about threads that he's barely qualified
to apply them. And apart from Rafael, there aren't too many
alternatives.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00753.html

=head2 Backporting the new C<blead> RE improvements to C<maint>

Nicholas Clark posted a proof-of-concept update to F<re.pm> to deliver
Dave Mitchell's iterative (as opposed to recursive) implementation
of the regular expression to perl 5.8.1 and beyond. A few show-stoppers
need to be cleaned up: some coredumps in the test suite need to be
sorted out and some tweaks to F<ppport.h> are needed. As a bonus,
Yves Orton's trie work comes along for the ride.

  More songs about building regexps
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00808.html

=head2 C<valgrind> and Perl 5

Nicholas Clark wondered what would happen, as in, how many bugs
would be uncovered, if one were to run the test suite under
C<valgrind>. So Rafael Garcia-Suarez did just that, and discovered
that 41 test files produce errors.

Nicholas and Rafael then set about fixing up the problems that
were uncovered.

  There's always something to do
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00622.html

=head2 Better reporting of TODO tests

Nicholas Clark looked at the unexpurgated version of the output
from the test suite and noticed that six tests were marked as
unexpectedly succeeding. In test parlance, these tests are called
TODO tests, since they show what there is to do. This state of
affairs is usually due to a test case that is expected to fail when
run, since it exercised a bug in perl that needed to be fixed, and at
some point, a source code change caused the failing test to succeed.

Nicholas saw that many of the really old regexp bugs that have been
fixed, had no TODO tests, and in any event, the default, summarised,
output of the test test suite makes no mention of them anyway, so
it is not as if anyone would have noticed the improvement.

So firstly, the test harness had to be upgraded to report the
summary of TODO tests that succeed, and (much more work) all the
open bugs need test cases written for them, so that it becomes
easier to see when they have been fixed.

Yves Orton hacked up his copy of C<Test::Harness> to do this. Andy
Lester took the idea and applied it to his development version
of C<Test::Harness> (see the "New Modules" section below).

Abe Timmerman updated the test smoke kit, in order to get all this
new goodness into the hands of the smokers.

  Much ado about todo
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00625.html

  Up in smoke
  rsync -avz source.test-smoke.org::ts-current .

=head2 Coverity coverage of CPAN modules

After having read the traffic on p5p concerning the errors that
Coverity uncovered, Alan Olsen what the possibilities were for
having the tests extended to cover CPAN modules with XS
components.

Johnathon Stowe realised that it was the output of C<xsubpp>
that needs to be tested, rather than the C<.xs> files themselves,
and wondered whether all the possible constructs it is possible
to have C<xsubpp> emit ere in fact being covered, and whether
one ought to create a dummy XS module that simply causes
C<xsubpp> to emit everything it knows how to.

Tim Jenness thought that that issue should be covered by
C<XS::Typemap>. Johnathon did some quick coverage calculations
and was surprised to learn that it wasn't too shabby.

Andy Lester volunteered to liaise with the Coverity people to
have XS-based modules analysed, should the authors in question
care to know the results. Randy W. Sims was concerned that some
authors might think of it as a ratings system. Be that as it
may, a couple of authors asked for analysis to be applied to
their modules.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00633.html

=head1 Patches of Interest

This week, Andy Lester performed some more C<op_type> shrinking in
F<sv.c> and F<dump.c>,

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00717.html

and hauled some variables down into tighter scopes in F<util.c>.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00719.html

=head2 212 warnings emitted by gcc-4.2

Marcus Holland-Moritz grew tired of watching an endless list of
warnings spew from compiling perl with a recent copy of C<gcc>,
so he patched things to get rid of the problems that gave rise to
them.

Andy Lester was pleased to hear of the work, since it had been
something of an annoyance for him too. He asked for a slightly
less monolithic patch, so that different classes of errors
could be fixed a bit at a time. Rafael eventually applied all
the changes.

  Understanding error messages
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00817.html

=head1 Watching the smoke signals

Nicholas Clark looked at a NetBSD smoke report, and wondered what it
was that was being tested in F<ext/B/t/bytecode.t> that was failing.
Whatever it was, he fixed it with change #27874.

  Smoke [5.9.4] 27855 FAIL(F) netbsd 3.0 (i386/1 cpu)
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00584.html

Steve Peters wondered why a test run was failing, simply because TEST
was seeing test results being delivered out of order, where as harness
didn't care.

  Smoke [5.9.4] 27939 FAIL(F) MSWin32 WinXP/.Net SP2 (x86/2 cpu)
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00836.html

=head1 New and old bugs from RT

=head2 F<op/cmp.t> and F<lib/bigfltpm> failures (#5708)

Steve Peters and Johnathon Stowe kicked this bug around, but as neither of
them have access to the platform in question it shall have to remain open
for the time being.

  OpenServer anyone?
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00696.html

=head2 Regex replace loses characters (#24704)

Rafael fixed this bug by accident while working on something else.
No-one minded.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00591.html

In fact, Steve Peters continued his thankless task of trawling
through old, open tickets and noticed that a certain number of
bugs had been solved by changes committed recently and not so
recently.

  Fixed in previous millenium
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00600.html

=head2 C<Sys::Syslog)>  requires \0 terminator in syslog messages (#28019)

Julian Mehnle called in from Debian-land to see what the status on this bug
was, explaining that some comments or documentation would help avoid bugs
being filed in the future.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00765.html

=head2 C<threads> and C<require IO> causes segmentation fault (#37076)

Nicholas Clark jotted down a couple of notes on how to fix this problem.

  Add it to the TODO
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00668.html

=head2 Oxymoronic example in perlvar (#38743)

Steve Peters wondered why Dave's excellent example shouldn't be used
to close this ticket.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00699.html

=head2 C<Text::ParseWords> doesn't always handle backslashes correctly (#38904)

John Vromans argued that the following equivalency was incorrect:

  is_deeply([shellwords("aa bb cc\\ ")], ["aa", "bb", "cc "])

Alexey Toptygin delved into the code to find out why and offered a patch
to make the behaviour a little more intuitive. Applied by Rafael.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00716.html

=head2 C<map> sometimes uses only the last mapped value (#38935)

Someone on Perlmonks posted an innocuous question about some strange
behaviour with C<map>, that turned out to be a caused by a change that
was applied in 1998. People were surprised at that such a bug had
remained unnoticed for so long.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00597.html

  The original thread
  http://www.perlmonks.org/index.pl?node_id=543989

=head2 C<Configure> won't handle versions 5.10.0 or 5.8.10. (#38945)

Andy Dougherty filed a bug on this problem so that people remember to
do something about it in time.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00660.html

=head2 Memory leak when calling C<system 1 foo> repeatedly (#38946)

An interesting discussion arose from this report. It turns out that
C<system 1, ...> does something interesting under Windows.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00658.html

=head2 Tests fail in 5.8.8 if C<$TMP> is not writable (#38947)

Gabor Szabo noted that certain tests F<lib/Memoize/t/tie_ndbm.t> fail if
the directory pointed to by C<$TMP> was not writable. He felt that a
diagnostic should explain more clearly what the problem is rather than
failing out of hand.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00659.html

=head2 Migration Problem from Dynix to Aix (#38951)

Karuppiah Subramaniam has a migration problem. If you have any advice to
offer, I'm sure it will be appreciated.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00758.html

=head2 C<exists> error message on wrong argument type is incorrect (#38955)

Jeremy Hetzler wished to clarify the error message received when
C<exists> use incorrectly, and bring it into line with the documentation.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00792.html

=head2 C<File::Find> documentation - is "Don't modify these variables" still valid? (#38965)

Steve Peters tweaked the documentation for C<File::Find> to specify more
clearly what happens to C<$_> in the callback routine.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00835.html

=head2 Perl5 Bug Summary

  9 created and 4 closed = 1543
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00590.html

  Steady as she goes
  http://rt.perl.org/rt3/NoAuth/perl5/Overview.html

=head1 New Core Modules

=over 8

=item *

Test-Harness version 2.57_06, by Andy Lester. This enhances the summary
result to indicate clearly the number of TODO test that have unexpectedly
begun to succeed, (usually due to underlying bugs being fixed).

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00827.html

=back

=head1 In Brief

Nicholas Clark carried out his threat to document B<code references in
C<@INC> and source filters> and also added a new feature at the same time.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00601.html

Paul Johnson read about the B<C<is_list_assignment> speedup patch> from
Andy Lester, and pointed the porters to a two year old thread on a
similar issue.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00693.html

Nick Ing-Simmons followed up on the issue of B<leaking file handles in XS code>.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00689.html

Jan Dubois B<removed some cruft from F<makedef.pl>>

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00544.html

Jarkko Hietaniemi tried B<a patch to F<regcomp.c>> to see if it would silence an
error from Coverity. It didn't. This led Jarkko to conclude that if Coverity
was too clever, or too stupid, to figure out what was really happening, then
maybe it's Red-flag-for-Refactoring time.

  It would help us, frail humans
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00546.html

He then nailed B<another leak that Coverity found in F<doop.c>>.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00565.html

Nicholas Clark saw that B<Coverity dislikes C<PerlIO_findFILE>>. The logic
seems a bit tortuous, so maybe that's not so surprising,

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00617.html

Nicholas looked at the B<last two unreviewed Coverity issues,
in F<regexec.c>> and wondered whether Coverity was getting confused.
Dave Mitchell explained that both issues were false positives.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00555.html

Alex Waugh provided the required information to B<support compiling perl
on RISC OS>.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00558.html

Andy Lester posted a short script to B<prune Jarkko's C<cpd> output>,
to show more clearly where Cut-And-Paste code was happening in areas
that interested him.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00560.html

Yitzchak Scott-Thoennes fixed B<building perl on C<Cygwin>>.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00561.html

Joshua Juran B<uploaded an experimental release of Lamp> on SourceForge.

  Lamp Ain't Mac POSIX
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00562.html

Andy Lester refactored B<the excessive use of C<PM_GETRE()> in F<pp_ctl.c>>.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00564.html

Jan Dubois and Steve Hay coordinated B<the ActiveState changes to
F<win32/Makefile>> in C<blead>, clearing up an issue concerning
64-bit environments at the same time

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00567.html

Nicholas Clark explained what he understood B<Larry's MAD patch> to be doing.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00575.html

The B<UTF-8 caching code> that Nicholas Clark worked on a few months
back wound up being exposed on the command-line via the C<-Ca> switch.

  Unless someone has a better idea
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00588.html

Nicholas Clark unearthed what is in hindsight B<a blindingly obvious
memory leak on unthreaded builds between C<Perl_newCONSTSUB> and
C<cv_undef>>.

  Nobody else knew what to do about it, either.
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00639.html

Andy Lester thought that B<C<GvUNIQUE()> and its ilk could be
removed> from the source. Rafael commented that the macros had
to remain, since at least C<Data::Alias> on CPAN refer to them.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00654.html

Ashish Agarwal was having problems with B<weird characters displayed
in the debugger>. Joe McGuire thought it was probably one of the thirteen
so-called variant characters in EBCDIC.

  \ [ ] { } ^ ~ ! # | $ @ `
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00677.html

Andy Lester B<cleaned up F<regexec.c>> following on from the recent
changes.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00692.html

Rick Delaney had discovered that B<F<fields.pm> lost their compile-time benefit>,
dating back to when pseudo-hashes were removed from C<blead>.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00771.html

Ken Williams asked for advice on some B<proposed C<File::Spec> changes for VMS>,
John E. Malmberg supplied what information he could. Ken lamented how
difficult it was to test VMS code if you didn't have access to a VMS box.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00823.html

Joshua ben Jore thought that the terribly B<cryptic 
C<select((select(OUTPUT_HANDLE), $| = 1)[0])> idiom> should be banished
from the documentation. Rafael bowed to reason.

  Just because you can
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00766.html

=head2 The previous summary

The cynics scoffed at the effort expended to clear the Coverity issues,
and Rafael pointed out that C<state> variables are almost but not quite
yet in C<blead>.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-04/msg00707.html

=head2 About this summary

This summary was written by David Landgren.

If you want a bookmarklet approach to viewing bugs and change reports,
there are a couple of bookmarklets that you might find useful on
my page of Perl stuff:

  http://www.landgren.net/perl/

Weekly summaries are published on F<http://use.perl.org/> and posted
on a mailing list, (subscription: F<perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org>).
The archive is at F<http://dev.perl.org/perl5/list-summaries/>.
Corrections and comments are welcome.

If you found this summary useful or enjoyable, please consider
contributing to the Perl Foundation to help support the development
of Perl.
