=head1 This Week on perl5-porters - 2-8 January 2006

5.8.8 and 5.9.3 are both terribly near to release. Who will
win? Tune in next week!

=head2 Cygwin status on C<maint> and C<blead>

Yitzchak Scott-Thoennes posted a status report concerning the
Cygwin port in November, 2005.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-11/msg00284.html

Yitzchak managed to scrape a few tuits together to bring the
issue back on the radar and offered a patch against C<blead>
to move forward. Rafael Garcia-Suarez doubted the portability
of the C<grep -e ... -e ...> (the program, not the builtin)
construct and wondered whether an alternation would be more
portable. H.Merijn Brand thought that multiple C<-e> switches
was more widely available. Andy Dougherty mentioned that
there weren't any viable C<grep> and multiple C<-e> solutions
on Solaris, and that C<sed> was a better option.

Yitzchak rewrote the patch using C<egrep> and one C<-e>.

  Cygwin gets better
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-01/msg00222.html

=head2 Problem using C<local> with C<threads::shared>

Another bug (#37671) from November, that had its tyres kicked
in December was cleaned up this week. Dave Mitchell broke the
problem into two distinct issues.

The first is an issue of C<local $foo = $foo>, when C<$foo> is
a a thread-shared scalar, or also a tied scalar or otherwise
having magic. A one-liner to demonstrate the problem:

  $! = 1; print "[$!]\n"; local $! = $!; print "[$!]\n"

(The second print is empty, instead of being the same as the
first). Dave couldn't think of an easy fix for this.

The second issue is the coredump on C<blead>. Dave committed
a change (#26569) to resolve that. And then he realised that
there was a third issue, that of leaking scalars. In the
simplest form:

  foo(\@a);
  sub foo {threads->new(...)}

... leaks. This caused Nicholas Clark to voice his suspicion
that weak references are getting cloned when they should not
be, but was having difficulty coming up with a test case to
prove or disprove the hypothesis. The following day, Dave
came back with some code to demonstrate the problem. Nicholas
outlined an algorithm to fix the problem. To be continued
next week...

  Leaks and threads and stuff
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-01/msg00052.html

=head2 Scanning for C<snprintf()> and C<vsnprintf()> in C<Configure>

After H.Merijn patched C<Configure> to silence warnings during the
detection of C<stdio> char signedness on Tru64 (patch courtesy of
Jarkko Hietaniemi), Jarkko then wondered whether it would be possible
to probe for the existence of C<snprintf()> and C<vsnprintf()>, as
these functions provide a safer API for people doing XS work.

Steve Peters delivered a first version, based on the assumption that
since these functions are reasonably "new", one should be able to
rely on the POSIX specification (that they return C<int>s). Russ
Allbery has apparently already been there and done that, and offered
a few tips on the subject. A number of changes were committed by
H.Merijn and Steve to get all this C<snprintf>y goodness in on as
many platforms as possible.

  More C goodness
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-01/msg00008.html

=head2 Teaching C<B::Concise> about optimised constant subs

Now that perl (space) optimises constant subroutines, Jim Cromie
thought it was time that C<B::Concise> knew how to display them.
He had some problems with some constants in F<POSIX.pm> that
display as "FOO exists in stash, but has no START" and wondered
if his work-around was correct.

Considerable discussion followed, tweaking the code to improve
its robustness, and veered into numerological considerations,
with Jim Cromie offering a beer to whoever scores patch #27182.

  Concision
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-01/msg00016.html

=head2 Much ado about PVGV and PVLV

PVGV are variables with attached magic. You can make them like
so:

  my $mg = *STDIN;

PVLV are lvalue variables. You make them this way:

  my $text = 'bergomask fairing';
  my $lv = \(substr $text, 2, 4);

Nicholas was worried whether it could be possible to contrive a
set of circumstances whereby, given the above...

    $mg = $lv;

...would fail. The issue at hand is that for a long time, a PVGV
variable was the biggest thing you'll find in perl's guts. And
C<Perl_sv_upgrade> knows how to upgrade from anything, except
a PVGV, because it was always the biggest.

But now a PVLV is larger, and Nicholas was wondering whether
it was possible to expose a PVLV without magic, which would
then cause C<Perl_sv_upgrade> serious indigestion.

Yitzchak noted that the code already rules out the possibility
of this occurring, but did find a problem with the following:

  sub TIEARRAY {bless{}}
  sub FETCH { *FETCH }
  sub FETCHSIZE { 3 }
  tie @a, "main";
  sub { $x = $_[0]; use Devel::Peek; Dump $x}->($a[2])

C<$x> winds up as a C<PVNV> instead of a C<PVGV>. But I'm not
sure of the ramifications, and in any case, the thread stopped
there.

  Defensive coding
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-01/msg00022.html

=head2 Patch 26370 breaks C<Acme::Meta>

Andreas J. König noticed that since change #26370 it has
become possible to create a file that can be C<use>d but
that perl cannot compile. One example was C<Acme::Meta>,
which ordinarily wouldn't be particularly worrisome, but
Andreas has a test in C<Devel::Symdump> that is based on
C<Acme::Meta>, so he had a problem.

Rafael had a look, and narrowed the problem down to:

  bleadperl -Mstrict -le 'BEGIN{print defined $foo::{bar}}'

and then committed change #26574 to make things work again.

  Have a look at my stash
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-01/msg00036.html

=head2 C<Sys::Syslog> test problems following patch 26555

Yitzchak spotted an intriguing error with C<Sys::Syslog>, due
to the fact a test file being skipped when tested. When the
code was corrected to make the tests proceed, an error cropped
up with some XS code that generates constants.

Nicholas said that he regarded the exact details of contstants
as mere implementation details, so one should not be too
surprised when the implementation details change. Rafael wanted
to know who much code Out There uses this technique, and
Nicholas described his helplessness at trying to ask gonzui
to search for constant when what he really wanted was to look for
"calls to a function named constant".

  Pay no attention to the subroutine behind the curtain
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-01/msg00038.html

=head2 Everyone's working too hard

Nicholas looked at the number of patches committed to the codebase
over the last eight years. After a lull in 2004, the changes have rolled
in with a vengeance this year, which explained why Nicholas was
having to spend so much time porting changes from C<blead> back into
C<maint>.

Abigail pointed out that there have been more changes, less arguments
but no new releases, There have been more than 6000 changes to the
codebase since 5.8.0 was released three and a half years ago. Shouldn't
we be ready for 5.10? The conversation continued on briefly about the
roadmap to Perl 6, with Ponie and 5.12 both getting a mention.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-01/msg00061.html

=head2 Cleaning C<Time::Local>

Dave Rolsky, wearing his C<Time::Local> maintainer's hat, asked the
porters whether anyone had objections to him running perltidy on
the source, and parenthesising particularly hairy math expressions.
For his own sanity as much as anything else. Rafael wasn't against
the idea, and Johnathon Stowe pointed out that he ran C<Term::Cap>
through perltidy when he sent in his last patch and that no-one
seemed to mind.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-01/msg00063.html

=head2 C<NV_ZERO_IS_ALLBITS_ZERO> C<Configure> problem

Jim Cromie wrote about the way he could provoke consistent smoke
failures, and of his investigation as to what was happening. He
narrowed it down to a snippet of code in C<Configure>... but had
no idea what to make of the inconsistent results he was getting.

H.Merijn wanted to know the I<precise> version of C<gcc> that Jim
was using. Nicholas tracked it down to some code of his, and
supplied a fix.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-01/msg00069.html

=head2 Bogus dirhandles raise no warnings

Mark Jason Dominus filed bug #36889 against 5.8.0. The following code
produces no output:

  perl -wle '$x=7; print readdir $x'

Steve Peters replied that in blead, the above code now produces the
error

  Bad symbol for filehandle

Yitzchak thought that saying "unopened dirhandle" would be preferable.
Steve pointed out that C<Perl_gv_IOadd> generates the warning, and the
exact text is unchanged since 5.003, which made him a little hesitant
about making the change.

Mark had also filed bug #36888, which was a slightly different problem:
when mistreating C<readdir>, perl complains about a I<filehandle> instead
of a I<dirhandle>. Steve Peters explained how the directory manipulation
routines are supposed to follow a POSIX standard, but across all the
platforms that Perl is supported, POSIX adherence is spotty. Nonetheless,
he added some code to make perl produce a correct error message.

  Bad symbols...
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-01/msg00084.html
  ... and bad filehandles
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-01/msg00091.html

=head2 MinGW and F<lib/CORE/Win32.h>

Sisyphus/Rob wrote in with a problem concerning MinGW and a simple
C program that does little more than include F<perl.h>, but the
compilation dies with problems about C<intptr_t> and C<uintptr_t>
typedef redefinitions. He was able to trace the problem down to the
use of C<-ID:/MinGW/include> to indicate that said directory is
searched for include files. He proposed a fix that involved a couple
of defensive C<#define>s in F<win32.h>.

Steve Hay had a look and noticed that in (the current) version 3.3
MinGW had changed their F<io.h> to pull in F<stdint.h>, and this
causes the duplicate definition errors. A work-around would be to
downgrade to 3.2 temporarily.

Steve then committed an amended patch to incorporate the initial
patch, safely
bracketed in a C<__MINGW32__> C<#ifdef> section.

And finally after a bit more detective work, Rob found the explanation
for the bizarre circumstances of the error. It turns out that you
can silently redeclare a type so long as it is in a system header,
but if it isn't, then an error is raised. The C<-I> switch was
causing gcc to get confused and assume that the files were not in
fact system headers.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-01/msg00128.html

=head2 macro "newSVpvn"/"sv_catpvn_flags" errors

Jim Cromie found that when doing C<make> after a C<make regen> on a recent
version of C<blead>, the compilation would issue a huge number of errors:

  macro "newSVpvn" requires 2 arguments, but only 1 given

... but only when threads were configured. Rafael spotted the problem and
connitted a patch to deal with the first level of macro expansion, so that
instead of:

  #define newSVpvs(str) newSVpvn(STR_WITH_LEN(str))

it now says

  #define newSVpvs(str) Perl_newSVpvn(aTHX_ STR_WITH_LEN(str))

Both C<a_THX_> and C<STR_WITH_LEN> are macros, although the former is
empty when building a non-threaded perl. And gcc cannot deal with the
expansion of both macros at the same time. This made Gisle Aas sad,
because he felt that it made C<STR_WITH_LEN> less usefulness, because
you can never use it directly as a argument to a function call, lest
than function itself become one day encapsulated in a macro.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-01/msg00129.html

=head2 VMS still compiles C<blead> but a few tests fail

Abe Timmerman was impressed that in spite of all the recent additions to
blead, VMS still manages to compile it at change 26652. There are still
a number of test failures, mainly to do with IO. John E. Malmberg went
through the list, giving his current status/awareness on the issues.

Paul Marquess chipped in with a tightened test for C<Compress::Zlib> in
the hope of silencing a warning (the existence of a file that should not
be there possibly being led astray by VMS's capacity to store multiple
versions of the same file).

A discussion followed as to whether C<Compress::Zlib> should be
updated for 5.8.8 or 5.9.3 or both. Paul wasn't too sure, as he's
done a lot of work on Compress::Zlib recently and felt it might
need a bit of time to settle. (What Paul has done is to abstract
the zlib code out from the core, in order to add other compression
formats, such as bzip2 and lzop).

  #26652
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-01/msg00149.html

Unforunately, by the time change #26660 hit the wire, things were
looking less rosy, with a C compiler spitting out errors. And then
Nicholas patched things up.

  #26660
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-01/msg00189.html

=head2 5.9.3 approaches

Rafael wants to release 5.9.3 soon and called asked people to hold
off committing big changes and start paying attention to smokes,
testing CPAN modules and ancillary Perl tools (like C<perldoc>,
C<dprofpp> and the like.

H.Merijn noted that C<DBM::Deep> was recently broken on blead.
Andreas said this was due to a bug in the module: the author had
tripped over pseudo-hashes by accident. Dave Mitchell said that he
wanted to land a fairly big change to C<threads::shared> and
including it in 5.9.3 would give it some needed testing.

Abigail asked what the plans were from here to 5.10. Rafael replied
that if a good lightweight IPC solution is found, it could be soon.
Paul Marquess understood that one of the constraints of 5.10 was
that there must be a Ponie capable of running it, but Nicholas had
understood the opposite: a 5.10 ponie must match a 5.10 native perl.
(Ponie is still looking for a pumpking/queen by the way).

Yitzchak mentioned that the new-fangled constant subroutines merit
an Incompatible Change entry, given that symbol tables now house
new, previously-unknown beasties.

Steve Hay found a problem in an XS module due to C<STRINGIFY> in
F<patchlevel.h>, and the dependency chain between it and F<perl.h>.
He wondered how many other XS modules are in the same boat, but
Gonzui was down. Gisle suggested changing the ouput of C<perl -v>
slightly, which would remove the need to use C<STRINGIFY> at all
in F<patchlevel.h>. Ensued a somewhat arcane discussion about how
best to represent the exact build level of a Perl release, whether
maintenance, development or snapshot. Gisle came up with probably
the best approach:

  new-style perl -v
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-01/msg00239.html

Steve Hay found another problem in one of his modules, in a bit
of C code that calls C<NEWSV> asking for a length of 8, and gets
back an C<SV> who's length is 12, rather than 8+1 (space for a 
trailing C<\0>. Gisle thought it slightly dangerous: one shouldn't
be worried if perl allocates a bit more memory than strictly
necessary, especially if it reduces the need for expensive
reallocations later on. Steve fixed his code.

  A call to testing
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-01/msg00175.html

Jim Cromie called for a review of F<perl593delta>, to make sure
that all the recent goodness added to C<blead> is accounted for
when 5.9.3 is released. Nicholas Clark came up with an account
of all the stuff he has been working on, as well as other work
by people like Dave, Jarkko, Rafael, Andy Lester and John E.
Malmberg.

Then there was Yves Orton's regexp trie optimisation, and 
new versions of core modules, and configure probes for
enabling more features from compilers.

  perl593delta review
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-01/msg00160.html

=head2 Configure won't handle versions 5.10.0 or 5.8.10

Andy Dougherty noticed that the code in Configure performs simple
scalar comparisons with version numbers using C<lt>. This is great
when all versions, sub-versions and revisions are single digits,
(after all, C<'5.8.7' lt '5.9.3'>), but it is disasterous when
the sub-version or revision goes to 10, and that could happen
in a reasonably short time frame.

This will have to be fixed up at some point in the future.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-01/msg00218.html

=head2 Better C<ithreads> shared variables.

Dave Mitchell landed a mega-patch (in terms of improvement) that
makes ithreads shared variables smaller and faster, by doing away
with the C<shared_sv> struct. "User-level locks and condition variables
are slightly slower, while everything else is quite a lot faster", to
quote the man himself. I think it stunned everyone into silence.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-01/msg00247.html

=head2 Comparing the speed of stat operations

R.K./Reikko filed bug #38179, reporting that C<-X _> is 20% slower
than C<-X> and that C<Fcntl>'s C<S_ISDIR> is 9 times slower than
a C<-d>, which benchmarks to show it. Nicholas Clark provided a
detailed analysis, pointing out a couple of faulty assumptions and
committed a change (#26701) to improve C<Fcntl>'s lacklustre
performance.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-01/msg00258.html
  orphaned reply
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-01/msg00297.html

=head2 Comparing the speed of constant subs

Jim Cromie made his own investigations on the performance of
the new Nicholas Clark constant subs, and while they use
much less space, sadly, they don't appear to go faster. No
feedback as yet.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-01/msg00263.html

=head2 New Core Modules

B<C<CPAN-1.81>> released by Andreas. Support for C<Module::Build>, use of
SHA-256 digests and bugfixes are the key points. By the end of the week,
with the arrival of bug fixes, we were up to 1.83.

B<C<version-0.52>> from John Peacock

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-01/msg00245.html

B<C<Sys-Syslog-0.12>> uploaded by Sébastien Aperghis-Tramoni. This new
version resolves the problems with C<constant> noted earlier in this
summary.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-01/msg00261.html

=head2 Perl5 Bug Summary

1506 open tickets, the lowest I've seen it since summary service
was resumed in September. Woohoo!

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-01/msg00367.html

  The list
  http://rt.perl.org/rt3/NoAuth/perl5/Overview.html

=head2 In Brief

B<speedy shared C<our> variables!> The bug #37946, posted
by Jerry D. Hedden a while back:

  noted in the In Brief section
  http://dev.perl.org/perl5/list-summaries/2005/20051212.html

was fixed by Dave Mitchell. As an added bonus, code of the
following nature:

  our @a : shared;
  for (1..10_000_000) {
    $a[$_ % 10_000]++;
  }

is now 7% faster. Along with the other thread fixes committed by
Dave this week, the overall improvement is a share more than 20%.

  Shared variables sped up
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-01/msg00260.html

Nicholas thought about B<C<perl_clone()> and C<-Dusemultiplicity>>
for a bit, and realised that since the problem mainly affects Windows
and that he doesn't have access to Windows development machines there
wasn't much he could do about it. He made a few suggestions, such as:
a better implementation of this area of the code.

  Windows dilemma
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-01/msg00020.html

The B<C<eval>, C<DESTROY> method and C<$@>> bug (#38034) was 
considered to be working as documented. The problem is
that there was no documentation. Mike Guy added the appropriate
information (the trick is to localise C<$@> when using C<eval>).

  eval destroys $@
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-01/msg00046.html

B<Removing NULL from Sys::Syslog>. Sébastien Aperghis-Tramoni
gave a status report on this issue and all other tickets (4)
open on RT at this time.

  Syslog status
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-01/msg00171.html

John E. Malmberg fixed a B<buffer overrun in F<vms.c>> and a C<const> problem
in F<utf8.c>.

  vms.c
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-01/msg00054.html
  utf8.c
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-01/msg00055.html

Robert Spier noted that B<64bit perl uses a huge amount of virtual
space> (for example, 59Mb rather than 6Mb in bug #38132. Dave
Mitchell suspected that it was due to massive objects being linked
into the program, pointing to locales as a likely culprit. And he
was right.

  Life in the 64bit lane
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-01/msg00058.html

Bug #36837 talks about the way B<C<B::Deparse> crashes and burns
when it encounters a C<ByteLoader>ed program>. Stephen McCamant
took the time to explain why it was so, and offers a short patch
to make it deal more gracefully with the situation.

  B::Deparse doesn't do ByteLoader
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-01/msg00067.html

Jim Cromie sent B<a patch to tweak the behaviour of C<-V:foo>> to make it play
a bit more nicely with shell tricks. Rafael warned of backwards compatibility
issues and wondered what a brand-new method would look like, and why. The
discussion sort of stopped there.

  Tweaking C<-V:> command line switch
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-01/msg00110.html

Joshua ben Jore wondered whether Robin's recent work on C<%^H> means
that user pragmas can be written, and sketched out an idea with C<lint>.
Rafael explained that the change only means that C<%^H> is now
availale during string evals. Before, it used to disappear at the
end of the initial compilation phase. But even now, C<%^H> is still
empty after compile time in regular code. I think the answer is no, then.

  User pragmas via %^H ?
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-01/msg00279.html

Gisle thought that some code to B<process C<-s> on the shebang line>
was redundant, and wondered whether it should be axed. Rafael agreed,
suspecting a mis-applied patch.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-01/msg00206.html

=head2 About this summary

This summary was written by David Landgren.

Information concerning bugs referenced in this summary (as #nnnnn)
may be viewed at http://rt.perl.org/rt3/Ticket/Display.html?id=nnnnn

Information concerning patches to maint or blead referenced in
this summary (as #nnnnn) may be viewed at
http://public.activestate.com/cgi-bin/perlbrowse?patch=nnnnn

If you want a bookmarklet approach to viewing bugs and change reports,
there are a couple of bookmarklets that you might find useful on
my page of Perl stuff:

  http://www.landgren.net/perl/

Weekly summaries are published on F<http://use.perl.org/> and posted
on a mailing list, (subscription: F<perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org>).
The archive is at F<http://dev.perl.org/perl5/list-summaries/>.
Corrections and comments are welcome.

If you found this summary useful or enjoyable, please consider
contributing to the Perl Foundation to help support the development
of Perl.
