=head1 This Week on perl5-porters - 22-28 May 2006

This isn't supposed to happen, obviously. It's unusual for C<Configure>
to pick up libraries that it can't, in fact, use. -- Andy Dougherty,
commenting bug #39195

=head1 Topics of Interest

=head2 C<Scalar::Util::weaken>, to have or have not

There was further discussion of the XS version of C<Scalar::Util>
and the fact that it offers a C<weaken> function which is vital to
avoid resource leaks when freeing self-referential structures.
(Specifically, it offers a method from Perl-space to intervene
directly on the underlying mechanism used for managing garbage
collection).

  There were five philosophers at a table
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00801.html

Adam Kennedy proposed C<Task::Weaken> as an elegant way (insofar
as a wart may be considered elegant) of dealing with the problem
of trying to create a dependency on the particular C<Scalar::Util>
version that happens to contain the C<weaken> routine.

  Not the other one
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00878.html

=head2 Following up on thread safety issues and opcode hints

Last month, Nicholas Clark discovered some obscure bugs that could
lead to race problems, with critical memory accesses not protected
by mutexes, or memory allocations going astray. He managed to sort
out a number of problems, and reported that there were a number of
issues that would need to be addressed.

  The fearsome five
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00770.html

=head2 Regular expression engine improvements

Yves Orton ran a post-mortem on his recent work to convert C</[c]/> to C</c/>,
and realised that a lot of the difficulty can be traced back to the memory
allocation strategy used. By its very nature, the strategy rules out a
number of interesting optimisation possibilities, because a regexp is
built with a two-pass compilation, and during the second pass,
too much information has already been discarded, so at that point it is
already too late to be able to consider a certain number of transforms.

Save more information up front, and then you stand a better chance of
being able to apply some useful optimisations to the resulting opcodes.
Hugo van der Sanden wondered whether it would be possible to produce an
opcode stream that would be amenable to processing by the existing
peephole optimiser.

Yves wanted to push a lot of the smarts from C<study_chunk> and C<regtail>
into the parse phase. And wrapped up with a patch to tidy the debug
output somewhat, and improve the trie code.

  Gentlemen, study your engine
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00781.html

Andy Lester wanted to add some consting goodness to F<regcomp.c>
and F<regexec.c>, which would have caused Yves considerable pain, since
he was in the middle of some deep core hackery, and didn't want to face
the nightmare of a three-way diff.

  Not now
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00928.html

After that, Yves delivered a verily impressive patch of new, shiny goodness
to the regexp engine. And if that wasn't enough, he also took Andy's own
consting work and folded that in as well. After a bit of adjustment due to
other patches going into C<blead> at the same time, Rafael managed to get
everything in place and running nicely.

  Right now
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00934.html

=head2 A tutorial on Unicode

Juerd Waalboer wrote a very nice tutorial to help people get started with
Unicode. A number of people contributed ideas and suggestions. Juerd
sifted through these and produced a second version. As we went to press,
inclusion in the core was pending.

  Unicode decoded
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00919.html

=head2 C<sprintf> and tainted format strings

Dave Mitchell revisited the C<sprintf('%n')> issue that made the
headlines back in December, and thought that it might be wise to
apply taint checks to the format string (the first argument to
C<sprintf>, proposed a relaxed or strict interpretation to what
tainting would imply and asked for opinions on the matter.

Andy Lester favoured the strict approach (I<any> use of a tainted
format string fails), but recalled that the idea had been dismissed
rapidly when put forward during the previous discussions. Steve
Peters thought that it was more a case of being set aside than
anything else, and expressed surprise at the fact that format
strings do not already have taint checking.

Rick Delaney wondered what exactly did Steve and Dave mean, and
put forward a couple of snippets to see if he understood the
issues.

  Just when you thought it was safe
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00917.html

=head2 Shooting yourself in the foot with overloading

Jarkko Hietaniemi was led astray by a somewhat unhelpful C<Use of
uninitialized value in hash element> warning caused by overloading,
and wondered if a better message could be generated if overloading
was involved.

While not directly answering Jarkko's question, Joshua ben Jore
mentioned that even more overloading fun can be had when using
C<Devel::Cover>, since applying C<defined> to an object will trigger
stringification there, but not during normal execution. Paul Johnson
was most surprised to hear this, and asked for a test case. David
Landgren provided a small example that exposes the problem.

Yves Orton confirmed that he had run into this problem when
developing C<Data::Dump::Streamer>, and had had to jump through
considerable hoops to work around it.

  Gun, meet foot
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00805.html

=head1 Patches of Interest

=head2 Test infrastructure improvements

Yves Orton noticed a problem due a recent tweak to C<Test::Harness>,
and fixed it so as to stop harness from printing the summary table
header for each row. Which does, it should be agreed, get tedious
after a while.

  No more excessive scrolling
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00789.html

At about the same, Andy Lester changed C<t/TEST> to queue up the
names of the tests that fail, to dump them at the end of the run.
This means one gets all the failing tests in one convenient chunk.

  No more scrolling back
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00802.html

=head2 More goodness from Andy

In his ongoing quest to const, Andy Lester sent in some refactoring
for F<av.c>, which crushed some incorrect uses of C<SvREFCNT_inc>,
removed unnecessary temporary variables and brought the usual
suspects into line.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00806.html

And a parameter to C<Perl_magic_existspack> in F<mg.c> that could
be made C<const>.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00937.html

And a similar treatment for C<Perl_gv_check> in F< gv.c>.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00938.html

=head2 C<Pod::Html> should not convert C<"foo"> to C<``foo''>

Gisle Aas hated this mis-feature, since most modern fonts produce a
spectacularly ugly result. After a bit of a detour into the realm of
C<troff>, it was decided to just use plain double-quotes instead.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00836.html

=head2 Relaxing the tests in F<Dynaloader.t>

Jarkko found that Sébastien Aperghis-Tramoni's tests in F<Dynaloader.t>
were too platform-specific to be useful. After a bit of discussion it was
decided to loosen up the test which attempted to trap the message generated
when the loading of a non-existent shared library is attempted.

  Eggs, bacon, sausage and spam
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00892.html

=head1 New and old bugs from RT

=head2 Memory leak from C<eval "sub { \$foo = 22 "> (#37231)

This used to leak memory (that is, trying to C<eval> a broken
subroutine definition). Dave Mitchell made it leak less. And then
after sitting back and looking at his handiwork, Dave made completely
water-proof.  Nicholas Clark still managed to poke a hole in it.
Unruffled, Dave countered with a King's Gambit that appeared to
keep any remaining errant allocations in cast-iron casing.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00885.html

=head2 C<IPC::Open2::open2> failures (#39127)

Dave Mitchell had a look at the source code, and noted that there was
a race condition depending on whether the child dies before or after
the parent tries to write to it. Furthermore, there is no easy way to
fix the problem as is, which is why C<IPC::Run> may be a better
alternative all round. Dave suggested a documentation patch to
clarify the situation.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00420.html

=head2 C<IO::Socket::connect> returns wrong C<errno> on timeout (#39178)

"mlelstv" showed some discrepancies in error messages depending on
whether it was the first or subsequent time that a socket connection
failed, and traced it down to a C<$!> not being cleared before a
system call.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00731.html

=head2 Optimizer bug in C<qr//> flags (#39185)

"johnpc" reported a bug in patterns using C<qr//> flags. Dave Mitchell
reported that this had been fixed in C<blead>, but not yet backported
to the maintenance branch.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00769.html

=head2 CPAN configuration stuck at C<Select your continent> (#39186)

Mark-Jason Dominus was in the middle of configuring his C<CPAN> client
when things started to go horribly wrong. Andreas Koenig wanted to have
a look at Mark's F<MIRRORED.BY> file. Mark took one look at the file and
saw that it was corrupt (well, empty), and therefore knew what to do.

  Delete and start over
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00776.html

=head2 C<perlfunc> on C<reverse> in scalar context (#39187)

Ted Pride had never noticed that C<reverse> also works on scalars:

  my $rev = reverse('forward'); # $rev contains drawrof

mainly because the documentation is slightly too clever for its own good.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00797.html

=head2 Error Report (#39195)

Sriram Madduri had configured a perl build, but at link-time the
build failed with some unknown libraries that C<Configure> had
specified. Andy Dougherty spotted what he thought was the cause
of the problem, but we didn't hear back from Sriram, so we don't
know if it's fixed.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00819.html

=head2 C<File::BOM> hangs during test (#39211)

Redirected to the module author. C<File::BOM> isn't core.

  y otras chicas del montón
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00864.html

=head2 Null pattern causing expected behaviour (#39212)

If it's causing the expected behaviour...

  it's not a bug
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00865.html

=head2 Optimiser doesn't constant fold C<$]> or C<$^V> (#39214)

Benjamin Smith wished that C<$]> or C<$^V> were constant-folded. This
could be useful, because then one could include sections of code for
specific versions of Perl that would be optimised away at compile
time if not applicable. Unfortunately, since these variables are,
well, variable, and not constant (in other words, you may assign
to them), this isn't going to work.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00887.html

=head2 C<Pod::HTML> should use &entities; for quotes (#39215)

Johan Vromans thought that this would be a nice idea. Gisle Aas
explained why it might be a bad idea, and that in any event, C<Pod::HTML>
had been tweaked to no longer emit the pugly C<``> and C<''> blots.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00869.html

=head2 Compiling With C<nmake> (#39226)

William C. Smith wanted to compile Perl with C<nmake>. Yves showed him
how to do just that.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00918.html

=head2 Perl5 Bug Summary

The previous week's bug summary, omitted from the previous summary (oops):

  7 created + 12 closed = 1507
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00497.html

And this week:

  8 created and 22 (!) closed = 1493
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00743.html

Hey! we broke through the 1500 barrier!

  Now, with added shinyness
  http://rt.perl.org/rt3/NoAuth/perl5/Overview.html

=head1 New Core Modules

=over 4

=item *

Version 0.60 of C<version> had a bit of trouble settling down in C<blead>, but
after smoothing a few rough edges it all came together.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00746.html

=item *

C<Test-Harness> 2.60 was released by Andy Lester.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00834.html

=item *

C<Sys-Syslog> 0.14 was released by Sébastien Aperghis-Tramoni,
featuring a number of bug fixes, and enhancements to the both the
code and test suite.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00858.html

=back

=head1 In Brief

Marcus Holland-Moritz documented and completed a few holes in the
orthogonality of B<literal string macros>, mainly as a service to
XS developers. Applied.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00738.html

Anno Siegel had some difficulties B<adding a core module> because it
was building man pages when it was not supposed to. Rafael provided the
necessary C<MakeMaker> magic to make it do the right thing at the right time.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00739.html

Andy Lester's B<second refactoring of F<pp_sys.c>> from last week went
in as change #28279.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00697.html

Alberto Simões thought that the problem of B<regexp slowness with
C<$'> and C<$`>> could be solved elegantly by making them lexical.
Dave Mitchell demonstrated why this was not possible (existing code
would break).

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00729.html

Torsten Foertsch wanted to know how to B<trap a warning generated at
global destruction time>. The test infrastructure doesn't appear up
to the task, because at global destruct time, all the tests have long
since finished. chromatic recommended running the test in a child,
and examining its output.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00735.html

B<F<perlhack.pod> was confused about C<POPSTACK>>, so Dave Mitchell and
Jan Dubois tightened the documentation. Deep core hackers rejoiced.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00791.html

Dave also B<improved the C<-Dpv> parser debugging output>.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00890.html

Philip M. Gollucci was having trouble with
B<C<Perl_croak> and C<nullch> at patch level 27529>.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00816.html

Jarkko noticed that there are B<no execute bits on semaphores on Mac OS/X>,
and tweaked the documentation to clarify the situation.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00852.html

Alex Davies cooked up a patch to B<shrink the object size for F<pp_sys.c>>,
but as the savings came at the cost of code legibility, with no apparent
run-time benefit, Rafael chose to decline it.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00936.html

=head2 About this summary

This summary was written by David Landgren. Yes, late enough to be
next week's summary. Sorry, this week I have been dealing with
assorted crises.

Last week's summary attracted a response from Dave Nicol, who
explained his linked list master plan in more detail.

  Action stations
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00860.html

If you want a bookmarklet approach to viewing bugs and change
reports, there are a couple of bookmarklets that you might find
useful on my page of Perl stuff:

  http://www.landgren.net/perl/

Weekly summaries are published on F<http://use.perl.org/> and posted
on a mailing list, (subscription: F<perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org>).
The archive is at F<http://dev.perl.org/perl5/list-summaries/>.
Corrections and comments are welcome.

If you found this summary useful, please consider contributing to
the Perl Foundation to help support the development of Perl.
