=head1 This Week on perl5-porters - 11-17 September 2006

"Now to move a huge pile of bugs out of my rt.cpan.org queue and
into Randy's. B<THUD>" -- Michael G. Schwern, making C<MakeMaker>
lighter.

=head1 Topics of Interest

=head2 Adding macros to Perl5

Jim Cromie followed up an old message from Salvador Fandiño about
better assertion support in perl. He went through the repository and
dug out all the patches, but when he applied them to blead it
wouldn't compile.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00100.html

=head2 threads causing smoke trouble on Win32 again

Steve Hay reported intermittent hangs when smoking threads on Win32.
He gathered a bit more information by running the tests manually,
but wasn't able to get things to fail reliably. Dave Mitchell
muttered something about race conditions in thread finishing, but
wasn't able to recall precisely what it was that he had noticed.

Jerry D. Hedden checked in a patch elsewhere to clear this up
this week.

  The race is on
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00117.html

=head2 Safe signals and C<SIGSEGV>

Rafael Garcia-Suarez wondered whether C<SIGSEGV> should be delivered
by default in unsafe mode, and pointed to a bug report in Mandriva
Linux that exposed the problem. Dave Mitchell tended to agree, and
suggested that C<SIGBUS> and C<SIGILL> be thrown in as well.

Mike Guy was in full agreement, and made a list of six points that
needed to be taken into consideration.

  "This is your Captain. We are about to attempt a crash landing"
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00145.html

=head2 Problems with C<(??{...})> in blead

Yves Orton was taking the latest engine for a spin and noticed
that C<Regexp::Common> revealed a problem with how C<(??{...})>
and backtracking no longer play nicely together.

Dave Mitchell admitted that he must have backed over something in
C<re_eval> and promised to straighten it out when he had a few
moments. Yves proposed one way of fixing it, after having taken a
look at (and understood) how it currently works. Dave begged Yves
not to go down that road, since it would rely on infrastructure
that Dave is currently in the process of ripping out and replacing.

  I hear shiny
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00164.html

=head2 C<Acme::Meta> is broken again

Andreas König noticed that change #26867 in blead resulted in
C<Acme::Meta> becoming unbuildable. Nicholas Clark noted that this
was the second time that it had been broken, and wondered if the
most expedient solution was simply to add C<Acme::Meta> to the core.

Seriously though, the question to be asked was is what it does
considered appropriate behaviour, and thus deserving of proper
support? In which case regression tests need to be added to the
test suite (C<Acme::Meta> plays fast and loose with stashes --
symbol table hashes). Rafael proposed a patch to C<Acme::Meta> which
restores full functionality (?) whilst keeping the the recent
speed optimisations that have been made in the neighbourhood.

  Acme Development Company
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00174.html

=head2 Help me-e-e-e-e

After a certain Chandra Sekaran posted a vague bug report that
mentioned PERL, LDAP and the MS Event Viewer, Dominic Dunlop provided
a detailed response on what steps Chandra should take to get the
problem fixed, which prompted Andy Dougherty to thank Dominic for
his kindness and patience over the years when dealing with such
reports.

  And he didn't even mention uppercase
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00187.html

Similarly, Dominic patiently walked a guy named Richard through
trying to identify why perl was crashing in a SpamAssassin/Mac OS/X
environment.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00313.html

=head2 More on trimming OPs

Dave Mitchell took a look at Jim Cromie's work on combining C<op_next>
and C<op_sibling> in the opcode structure, and wanted to obtain
better figures on what the memory difference would be. Dave thought
that the massive creation of SVs that come about when one does any
sort of work would drown out the savings made in shrinking the
opcodes.

As Jim had been encountering difficulties in getting the patch to
work correctly, he had been asking for help (which then in turn
would allow such benchmarks to be obtained). Dave Mitchell suggested
an elegant trick that at least defers having to get it to work.

Just add an extra dummy field to the structure and see how much the
overall programs grows. One could then conclude that if Jim were
to succeed in his efforts, the program would shrink by an equivalent
amount in the other direction.

Depending on the code, the change is negligible or significant.
More real-world code samples will be needed to see whether it is
worth pursuing. Joshua ben Jore reminded him that C<B::Deparse>,
C<Data::Dumper> must not be broken because of such changes.

  Union structure blues
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00219.html

David Nicol set about trying to prod the compiler into producing
large amounts of code to shed light on Jim's improvements.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00337.html

=head2 Core support for C<Data::Bind>

Chia-liang Kao explained what new core support would be required
to make C<Data::Bind> (which provides Perl6-style semantics for
subroutine arguments) a little less of a kluge. The main problem
is to have a read-only lexical alias that points to a regular
read-write lexical.

The easy way out would be to hang the information off the target
SV, but then the original SV naturally becomes read-only as well,
which is exactly what we're trying to avoid. Thus some sort of shim
layer is needed between the alias and the original to get a chance
to to the deed, which caused chromatic to mutter something out
bestowing a new vtable upon an SV.

Rick Delaney and Rafael Garcia-Suarez debated syntax. Nicholas Clark
and Larry Wall debated implementation issues (with an eye to backwards
compatibility: any number of suitable solutions exists, but they
would break existing XS code. Not good).

  ... and in the data bind them
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00194.html

=head2 Taint and memory usage

Xho Jingleheimerschmidt wondered why running a program with taint
checks appears to double the amount of memory required. This can
be a problem on lean machines. Xho wanted to know if there is a
work-around for it, or failing that, an explanation of why it occurs.

I figured out one part of the problem and will have posted a partial
reply next week, but you'll have to wait until then and see whether
an internals guru picks up the ball and runs with it.

  Getting ahead of myself
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00304.html

=head2 Dual-lifing C<Devel::DProf>

Andy Lester, evidently having too much spare time on his hands,
thought it would be a good idea if he were to take care of
C<Devel::DProf>. Except that it's noted on CPAN that Ilya Zakharevich
is already the author. Then again, the version bundled with C<blead>
is different, anyway.

Ilya was rather non-committal on the idea, citing that while a more
portable codebase is desirable, the module is too intimately tied
to perl's internals for it to be easy to make a one-size-fits-all
distribution. Rafael thought that it might lead to a twisty maze
of C<#ifdef>s.

Be that as it may, Andy was most interested in making improvements
to the C<dprofpp> end of things. (Which makes me wonder whether the
distribution needs to be some dimorphic beast: one side that gathers
profiling information, and the other side that does the reporting).

  More like dual-heading it
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00321.html

=head1 Patches of Interest

=head2 Race condition fixes for threads

Jerry D. Hedden posted a patch to fix what he thought was the cause
of the race conditions that have been seen (above) with threads.
Dave Mitchell appreciated the effort, but rebuked Jerry for mixing
in trivial stylistic changes with serious open-heart surgery on
mutexes.

It becomes difficult to see what is important, makes it harder to
track changes, and increases the workload of the C<maint> pumpking
who has to try and merge this stuff.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00156.html

So Jerry redid the patch to make it easier for people to follow
along at home. Rafael smoked the patches on a hexaprocessor box,
gave them a clean bill of health, and so they were applied.

  Flying colours
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00181.html

=head2 C++: Solaris CC now compiles "perl"

Jarkko Hietaniemi sent in an update concerning his work to get
the perl sources compiling with C++. It caused the Win32 compile
to bomb, so Yves Orton rewrote the nasty bits and got it to
work.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00161.html

And then some more from Jarkko:

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00269.html

Jarkko also rewrote the C<Encode>-generated code to make it safe
for C++ compilers.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00288.html

=head2 How to handle C<(?=)> and C<(?E<lt>=)> properly

Yves Orton added more shiny goodness to the regular expression
engine, this time boosting the performance of zero-width
lookahead assertions. In the benchmarks that Yves had available,
this was the last area where Python was previously outperforming
Perl.

  Getting your bearings
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00166.html

Elsewhere around the engine, Yves started to add hooks into it to pave the
way for making a pluggable regular expression engine. (Which may lead, for
instance, to Yves and Dave Mitchell's  work in blead one day making it back to 
maint. Or running the PCRE engine inside Perl).

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00363.html

=head2 VMS goodness for the C<Module::Build> beta

Craig Berry sent Ken Williams a patch to reduce the number of
failures observed when testing C<Module::Build>. The situation
is still not perfect, but Craig felt certain that this batch
of changes would not create problems on other platforms.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00170.html

=head2 Fixing C<\N{...}> in regular expressions

A couple of months back, Sadahiro Tomoyuki showed that C</a\N{PLUS
SIGN}b/> is parsed as C</a+b/> instead of the more Do-What-I-Meanish
C</a\+b/>. Yves Orton delivered an impressive patch to correct that
behaviour. Tomoyuki went through the patch with a fine-toothed comb
and made many suggestions. H.Merijn Brand applied it.

  Unicode unified
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00308.html

=head2 Patching F<win32.c> to fix bugs #38723 and #39531

Andrew Savige mailed in a patch to correct a couple of Windows bugs
dealing with backticks. In fact, there were two patches, one for maint
and one for blead. How thoughtful.

Yves went over it and gave it the thumbs up. Rafael took it for a spin
on an SMP box but the tests would hang from time to time. But since
there is a net improvement, it's all gone in, and the test has been
marked TODO until such time as Yves or someone else can take a closer
look.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00344.html

=head1 Watching the smoke signals

=head2 Smoke [5.9.4] 28821 FAIL(XF) OSF1 V5.1 (EV6/4 cpu)

Jarkko discovered that Finnish locales, threads and regexps was a
potent brew that caused all sorts of smoke to come flying out of
his machine. Yves started to sift through the evidence to look for
what was going wrong.

After a short while, he hacked up a quick and dirty fix that consisted
of disabling C<study> for UTF-8 strings. And after another look he
didn't feel so bad about the idea, since the code seemed to indicate
that it couldn't work anyway.

Rafael had another look at the patch that had given rise to the
problems, and noted that it was only the test part of the patch
that appeared to be in error.

Yves finally hit paydirt. The test was actually correct. The code
was wrong. Looking at old patch from Ilya Zakharevich some time
last century, where a change from double- to single-quoting of some
embedded Perl code meant that from that time on, the test has been
patiently studying a stringified reference instead of a reference
to a string, and that UTF-8 and C<study> has been broken forever.
Jarkko was lost for words. But then quickly recovered and gave Yves
his next challenge.

Jarkko and Yves then discussed how Perl should have really implemented
UTF, properly. Yves hoped that the Perl 6 crowd have learnt their
lessons well.

  I never liked studying, anyway
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00210.html

=head2 Smoke [5.9.4] 28849 FAIL(m) MSWin32 WinXP/.Net SP2 (x86/2 cpu)

Sadahiro noticed a that a declaration list contained a statement,
which is a no-no for some compilers. Once that was fixed the smoke
cleared up.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00339.html

=head2 Smoke [5.9.4] 28848 FAIL(Fm) OSF1 V5.1 (EV6/4 cpu)

Jarkko noted another failure, that occur when the locale in use uses
a comma as a decimal point. This reminded H.Merijn Brand of Stupid
Locale Tricks to try with Windows, and John Peacock wondered how he
could better test C<version.pm> to deal with this stuff.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00358.html

=head1 New and old bugs from RT

=head2 ref counting bug (#21945)

Steve Peters thinks this is a heisenbug, so he asked for other
people to take it for a spin, just in case he was seeing things
(or not).

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00323.html

=head2 F<XSUB.h> version check may fail due to locale (#37714)

Rafael hauled out a previously unknown macro into the light to
fix up this bug. John Peacock was most appreciative, and begin
to fold it into C<version.pm>, when Rafael came up with an even
better patch. So John patched Rafael's patch to do some other
things he needed it to do.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00305.html

=head2 -0.0 loses signedness upon numeric comparison (#39875)

Michael G. Schwern wondered why this bug was still open, since
there's a patch ready and waiting to be be applied.

  ping
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00331.html

=head2 Re: File::Spec-E<gt>case_tolerant() should return true on Cygwin (#40103)

Michael also wasn't sure what was case tolerant and what wasn't, at
proposed a simple test to solve the issue.

  A sensitive matter
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00314.html

=head2 g++ 2.95.3 on Solaris 8 can't compile F<perl.h> C<__attribute__> (#40317)

Christopher D. Malon was having trouble getting an old GNU C++ compiler
to compile an XS module. No solution appeared to be forthcoming
immediately.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00186.html

=head2 Question? (#40322)

A question was asked about how to tell what C<nalloc> routine was compiled
into perl, and an answer was given.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00207.html

=head2 Documentation patch for F<perlfunc.pod> (#40327)

Merijn B. (the I<other> Merijn) noted one passage in C<perlfunc>
concerning C<stat> that was less than clear and proposed a fix.
Applied by Rafael.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00254.html

=head2 overload::Overloaded depends on bad Class-E<gt>can (#40333)

Joshua ben Jore wanted to do some really weird stuff to
C<overload::Overloaded>, because he was trying to build an instant
box of death. This would be used to help test to ensure that an
introspective module doesn't trigger overloading or magic by accident.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00274.html

=head2 C<pod2man> output is hyphenated by groff (#40344)

hjp@yoyo noticed that the nroffish output produced by C<pod2man>
is incorrectly hyphenated by C<groff>, and added the necessary
nroff incantation to fix it up. Rafael noted that this is fixed
by Russ Alberry's latest release of C<podlators>.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00354.html

=head2 Perl5 Bug Summary

12 down, 9 up, 1528 total, for an overall week-on-week decline for
the first time in a while.

  stats
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00192.html

  and more stats
  http://rt.perl.org/rt3/NoAuth/perl5/Overview.html

=head1 New Core Modules

=over 4

=item *

Ken Williams released beta version (0.2805_01) of C<Module::Build>.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00130.html

=item *

Jos Boumans announced the release to CPAN of CPANPLUS version 0.074.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00137.html

=item *

Michael G. Schwern released another iteration of C<ExtUtils::MakeMaker>,
now standing at version 6.30_04.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00197.html

=item *

Michael also kicked two more kids, C<ExtUtils::Command> and
C<ExtUtils::Manifest>. out of the MakeMaker menagerie.  Randy Kobes
will take care of them.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00300.html

=item *

Now that Audrey Tang has clarified the licensing issues surrounding
C<Locale::Maketext::Simple>, which is a dependencyC<Params::Check>,
both modules have been added to the core.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00140.html

=item *

Russ Allbery released the latest version (2.0.5) of C<podlators>.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00355.html

=back

=head1 In Brief

Turns out that Perforce does have B<flexible commit hooks to perform
actions when a file changes>.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00332.html

Yet another person wondered how to deal with B<C<Storable> version
mismatches>.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00104.html

Jerry D. Hedden was looking at B<F<threads/shared/typemap>>. It
B<was removed in a patch> by accident, and then subsequently
reinstated. Jerry wondered why, since it is a zero-length file
that apparently serves no purpose.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00116.html

And the patch to reinstate it didn't square with B<the APC ("Archive
of Perl Changes") repository>, and left the latter in an uncertain state.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00122.html

Jonathan Rockway wanted to know whether one could B<compile Perl 5
for Qtopia devices>. Paul Johnson provided a couple of tips.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00151.html

Gabor Szabo wondered whether errors about the B<signedness of pointer
targets in F<Normalize.xs>> in 5.9.4 were the same as those in
C<Net::RawIP>. Whatever the case, Gabor fixed the problem with a
couple of casts.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00163.html

Yves Orton finally became sufficiently annoyed by the B<C<mktables>
executes seven time per build> mazurka and decided to do something about
it. So he did. Yay! Rafael applied it. Yay!

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00180.html

Yitzchak Scott-Thoennes was looking at the B<ongoing coredumps in
Cygwin> and finally suggested a one-liner involving C<sv_setpvn>
and C<NULL>. Applied by Rafael.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00183.html

We are still looking for a volunteer to work with Klocwork in order
to B<perform an analysis of perl code>. (At the C side, that is).

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00353.html

Jarkko removed the B<probe for C<-Wdeclaration-after-statement>>
from C<Configure>.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00202.html

Also, if your exotic platform has been having an environmental
crisis with blead, it may be due to Jarkko's B<diddling of
C<Perl_my_setenv()>>. So the diddling was undiddled.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00359.html

Premchai noted that B<C<perlsec> talks erroneously about a "Non-Finite Automaton">
when in fact it should be talking about a Nondeterministic Finite Automaton.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00109.html

In case you hadn't noticed, B<JPL (the Java/Perl thing) has been removed
from C<blead>> and will not be present in 5.10.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00228.html

Ben Morrow showed me a simple of trick to cope with what happens
B<when perl headers conflict with systems headers>.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00297.html

David Nicol added a bit about B<C<B::Deparse>'s failure to grok
outer lexical scopes> in its BUGS section.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00255.html

=head2 About this summary

This summary was written by David Landgren.

If you want a bookmarklet approach to viewing bugs and change
reports, there are a couple of bookmarklets that you might find
useful on my page of Perl stuff:

This Week on perl5-porters (1-10 September 2006)
http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00316.html

  http://www.landgren.net/perl/

Weekly summaries are published on F<http://use.perl.org/> and posted
on a mailing list, (subscription: F<perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org>).
The archive is at F<http://dev.perl.org/perl5/list-summaries/>.
Corrections and comments are welcome.

If you found this summary useful, please consider contributing to
the Perl Foundation to help support the development of Perl.
