=head1 This Week on perl5-porters - 2-8 October 2006

I<"I do not know what crazy things people have done in code I cannot
see. But people are creative in strange ways, and I cause them
enough trouble already by incorporating changes with unintended
behaviour changes."> -- Nicholas Clark, on why it pays to be cautious.

=head1 Topics of Interest

=head2 Outdated modules in blead

Andreas König noted that there were eight modules in blead that had
more recent counterparts on CPAN, mentioning that one of them,
C<Text::Soundex>, was intentionally neglected.

The reason for the neglect is that nobody cares about it any more, but since
it is in core, it cannot be removed. Those people who do need it know
enough to go to their local CPAN mirror and pick up the speedier XS-based
version. H.Merijn Brand thought that some effort should nonetheless be
made to keep C<blead> and CPAN synchronised.

Steve Peters brought the most of listed modules up to date.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-10/msg00035.html

=head2 Upgrade (or not) to threads-shared 1.03

Dave Mitchell went ballistic over the application of this patch, due
to its gratuitous whitespace changes, as this makes it harder to
see what the the true changes are. Similarly, people chasing down
bugs in the future will stumble each time they have to traverse it.

  Stop fiddling with the bloody whitespace
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-10/msg00048.html

=head2 Overloading thread stringification

Jerry D. Hedden asked what the porters thought of overloading C<"">
in the C<threads> module to return the thread identifier, since it
would make some constructs prettier.

John Peacock and Nicholas Clark didn't like the idea, as it seem
to admit the possibility of breaking programs that relied on the
existing behaviour (getting back a string like
C<threads=SCALAR(0x209e270c)>).

Jerry, still not quite getting it, asked if that meant that the
possibility of incompatibility ruled out any chance of improvement.
So he floated the idea of an addition on the CPAN module that would
never be backported to C<maint>, but that would be akin to a code
fork.

Gisle Aas disliked it as well. He had been down this track many
years ago, and has since come to the conclusion that this sort of
"feature" eventually winds up causing more problems that the ones
it was supposed to solve.

Johnathon Stowe summed up the problem neatly, and it is this: no
one can guarantee that there is no code anywhere that does something
like

  if ("$thread" =~ /^threads/)

regardless of whether this is a desirable way to test for an object
being a thread. With that in mind (and this is really what the
backwards compatibility game is all about), there was little chance
that the patch would be applied. Since behaviour is being changed,
regardless of what merit or value it has, new behaviour can only be
activated by asking for it.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-10/msg00086.html

Despite the arguments against the proposal, Jerry went ahead and
made the change. Rafaël declined to integrate it into C<blead>.
Jerry finally admitted defeat, and said he'd add an C<import()>
verb to activate the change.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-10/msg00110.html

Which in fact, he did. Applied as change #28958.

  And they all lived happily ever after, kthnx
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-10/msg00159.html

=head2 C<regmatch()> restructuring complete

Dave "Leakbane" Mitchell announced that his restructuring work on
C<regmatch()> was now complete. Now no more recursion fakery is
needed, all backtracking is now done via a single backtracking
state stack. Dave was quite pleased to see that the amount of
state required had been shrunk from 72 bytes down to 44 bytes (on
32-bit systems).

Dave posted the large comment that explains the matching strategy
for we other mere mortals to ponder. Yves Orton was pleased as Punch,
since he realised this would simplify the things he wants to
implement.

  Affairs of state
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-10/msg00128.html

=head2 patch 28900 breaks libwww

Andreas König noticed that change #28900 causes C<HTTP::Daemon>
to fail, specifically, a slice of C<stat _> gets garbled.

The odd thing was that change #28900 was one of Yves's patches for
the regular expression engine. Neither Yves nor Rafaël Garcia-Suarez
could figure out why that would be, but Andreas was certain, postulating
some weird side-effect.

It turns out to be a poor assumption in the C<HTTP::Daemon> code,
which assumed that C<_> (the underscore filehandle) is lexically
scoped (which in fact, it never was). So if you call a subroutine
and then access it afterwards, it's possible that the subroutine
will have used it for its own purpose. And that's exactly what
happened here.

Yves was relieved, but thought about what he could do to minimise
the impact in the future.

  Action at a distance
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-10/msg00168.html

=head2 Locale-dependent testing

John Peacock reported having worked on C<version> objects in the
presence of locales, where commas may be used for decimal points instead
of the anglo-saxon period. The code was easy, (since Rafaël had done
most of the heavy lifting), but John was wondering how to test it. He
asked for a show of hands (off-list) to see who had the 'de_DE' locale
present on their machine.

H.Merijn Brand noted that he tended to delete all non-crucial locales
from his machines, since localised software tended to enjoy installing
their documentation in all the locales on the machine for which it
had a corresponding version. This can lead to rampant disk space
consumption, and even require reboots, should the software in
question be kernel-related.

Jarkko Hietaniemi suggested setting up a list of all the locales in
the world that used non-period decimal points, and iterating over them
until one pops up on the machine running the tests. John already had
similar code that does this, so he promised to whip up a development
version of C<version>, and get people to smoke it for a while and see
what comes out.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-10/msg00184.html

=head2 C<Data::Dumper> might be faster now

Nicholas Clark tweaked C<Data::Dumper> slightly to reduce the amount
of C<realloc()>s being performed. The results were quite surprising.
Andy Lester acquired the necessary commit bits to update the CPAN
version.

  Dumpin' goodness
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-10/msg00197.html

=head1 Patches of Interest

=head2 F<cflags.SH>: rethink of the gcc C<-std=c89> and C<-pedantic>

Jarkko and H.Merijn continued to work on this, getting to the stage
where it was good enough to be applied.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-10/msg00014.html

=head2 Named captures in regular expressions

Yves Orton delivered a first cut at implementing named captures in Perl.
This allows the following:

  'falange' =~ /(?<end>....)$/ and print $+{end} # prints "ange"

This comes in very handy when you have lots of nested capturing
groups, since you no longer have to count parentheses, nor do you
have to renumber your C<$1>, C<$2>, C<$3>, ... when you insert a
new capturing group somewhere in the middle.

H.Merijn Brand thought that this was so cool that it was nearly
enough all by itself as being sufficient reason to upgrade Perl.

The thread became sidetracked into improvements for Johan
Vroman's C<makepatch> program. After a number of suggestions
from Yves and Dr. Ruud, Johan promised to release a new version.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-10/msg00131.html

Yves merged his and Dr. Ruud's patch into a single metapatch
for C<makepatch>.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-10/msg00217.html

=head1 Watching the smoke signals

=head2 Smoke [5.9.4] 28908 FAIL(XF) linux 2.6.17-1.2187_FC5 [fedora] (i686/1 cpu)

Steve Peters smoked a build with a recent gcc compiler and gouts of
oily black smoke poured out of the vents. Jarkko interpreted this as
meaning the gcc has become more aggressive in its ANSI conformance
checks. That's the good news. The bad news is that the code base uses
the non-ANSI C<long long> datatype, for 64 bits of goodness. Jarkko
was hoping that there was some way to placate gcc over this minor
transgression.

  Maybe if we slaughtered a chicken
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-10/msg00003.html

=head1 New and old bugs from RT

=head2 perl v5.7.0 +DEVEL8481 on i86pc-solaris-64int 2.9 (#5281)

Steve Peters reasoned that this bug had been fixed, but looking through
the patches, could not determine which one was responsible.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-10/msg00061.html

=head2 C<read>, C<fork> and C<exit> mismatch file positions (#5999)

The Solaris man page says it all: if you do I/O in a child process
with the file descriptors inherited from the parent, you have to be
very careful how the child exits, otherwise strange surprises await
you.

Aaron Sherman wondered if there was a way of squirrelling the necessary
information away somewhere, so that the child would do the right
thing in this event. Steve Peters cautioned that no one had sat
down and worked through all the delicate intricacies of fork-related
issues, especially when one considers threads at the same time.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-10/msg00078.html

=head2 fairly large regex optimization bug with 5.7.3 (#8835)

Steve then returned to a regexp bug filed by Jeffrey Friedl, no less,
and noted that the poor observed performance had been corrected due
to Yves Orton's trie work.

Yves noted that this was indeed the case, yet Jeffrey's analysis of
the problem was indeed correct. There are a number of ways in which
an alternation can be dealt with by the engine, and these work more
or less efficiently depending on the pattern and the target (a bit
like an SQL query planner). It turns out that when non-capturing
parentheses C<(?:...)> were added to the engine, the optimiser started
making bad decisions, such as the one noted by Jeffrey.

At first, Yves couldn't see an easy way to make this work without
introducing additional overhead. Hugo van der Sanden thought
that it might be worth examining end anchors and finite maximum
match widths as well. He thought that a number of anchor-related
optimisations have broken since the C<\A>, C<\Z> and C<\z> anchors
were introduced, and by the same token that other new optimisations
are now possible.

Yves then discovered an cheap, fast, reliable solution to the problem.

  Pick all three
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-10/msg00060.html

=head2 C<File::Find> has issues with symlinks (#40417)

Rafaël tried out the supplied patch for this problem, but noted
that it broke three tests in C<blead>'s regression tests. He asked
for an updated patch (with more tests) to take this into account.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-10/msg00068.html

=head2 Halting perl with control-C sometimes causes crash on windows (#40445)

Alex Davies filed a bug on the problem of Control-C causing
core dumps on Windows. No takers for the moment, but Yves Orton
mentioned this behaviour recently.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-10/msg00028.html

=head2 Possible pointer corruption? (#40450)

Benjamin Carter showed how a small script with C<redo>, C<eval>
and C<@_> would crash regularly. Dave Mitchell believes the
underlying problem was fixed by change #24384.

  next and redo didn't restore PL_curcop
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-10/msg00070.html

=head2 Installation of perl 5.8.8 on Linux RH 9 (#40453)

Tasnim was running into problems building perl. Andy Dougherty
suspected that there might be a problem with the F<config.sh>
file, and suggested that Tasnim delete the source tree and
start afresh.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-10/msg00077.html

Tasnim followed up with another bug report (#40454), but the
porters didn't hear back from him after their suggestions
were given

  So maybe it works
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-10/msg00076.html

=head2 Memory leak with C<MULTICALL> (#40469)

Tassilo von Parseval found a memory leak, and thought that
C<MULTICALL> was responsible. No takers.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-10/msg00215.html

=head2 C<glob> misbehaviour regarding special characters and spaces (#40470)

David Serrano found what he thought was a problem in C<glob> with
files or directories that contain spaces. No takers, possibly because
everyone hates files and directories that contain spaces.

  Curse those Redmond boys
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-10/msg00218.html

=head2 Perl5 Bug Summary

  8 more this week
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-10/msg00022.html

  http://rt.perl.org/rt3/NoAuth/perl5/Overview.html

=head1 In Brief

Terry Glanfield demonstrated B<a nifty bug in C<Storable>> to show
that C<Storable::freeze([$r, $r])> doesn't work. Adam Kennedy asked
him to open a ticket on C<Storable>'s CPAN RT queue.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-10/msg00058.html

Steve Hay noticed that B<C<threads> tests were hanging in Win32
smokes again>, and wondered if changes #28922 and #28923 had anything
to do with it.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-10/msg00106.html

Dave Mitchell explained to Dave Rolsky that B<the 5.8 code for
closures has a number of subtle bugs>, and will probably always remain
that way.

  But wait until 5.10
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-10/msg00189.html

Paul Green B<updated the Stratus VOS files>.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-10/msg00059.html

Now that it has been ANSIfied, B<the C<zlib> library can be build
with C<g++>>.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-10/msg00081.html

Alan Olsen pointed to a couple of B<threads on Perl Monks that dealt
with C<Exporter> problems>, suggesting that the problems raised
there, and the attendant solutions, should be included on the
C<Exporter> documentation.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-10/msg00141.html

Paul Marquess added some B<C++ goodness to C<List::Util>>.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-10/msg00147.html

And Jarkko continued his own B<peculiar brand of compiler
gymnastics>.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-10/msg00173.html

The B<One Laptop Per Child> project no longer requires Perl. When you only
have 500Mb of Flash memory to play with...

  ... every byte counts
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-10/msg00211.html

=head2 About this summary

This summary was written by David Landgren.

Weekly summaries are published on F<http://use.perl.org/> and posted
on a mailing list, (subscription: F<perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org>).
The archive is at F<http://dev.perl.org/perl5/list-summaries/>.
Corrections and comments are welcome.

If you found this summary useful, please consider contributing to
the Perl Foundation to help support the development of Perl.
