=head1 This Week on perl5-porters - 11-17 December 2006

=head1 Topics of Interest

=head2 Change 29504 breaks Win32 build

Some changes to the parser code (in F<perly.y>) made by Dave Mitchell
in an attempt to lock down C<BEGIN{ die }>-type leaks broke things
in Windows land. Many platforms appeared to be affected. The problem
turned out to be some debugging code left in by accident.

Another oddity was that C<make distclean> left a few object files
behind, which didn't make sense (and did not occur on all platforms).
Apparently the issue was sorted out because nothing more was heard
on the subject.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-12/msg00248.html

=head2 C<umask> handling in C<File::Temp>

Peter Dintelmann noticed that C<_gettemp()> in the C<File::Temp>
module can make needless C<umask> system calls under a number of
circumstances, and came up with a patch to take this into account.

Mike Guy commented that whether Peter's patch is applied or not,
the code does not appear to be thread-safe. So Peter thought about
it a bit more, and realised that C<umask> does not have to be called
at all, although he was not sure whether VMS would still need to.

And the problem of C<umask> thread safety for creating
both temporary directories and the C<_force_writable> routine remains.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-12/msg00287.html

=head2 Should C<$thr-E<gt>join()> propagate exceptions to joiner?

Jerry D. Hedden asked if there was interest in adding a method
to the C<threads> module that would allow people to detect
problems in the case of a thread dying unexpectedly. And the
people who responded, agreed.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-12/msg00288.html

=head2 Named-capture regular expression syntax

Aaron Crane pointed out an inconsistency with the new named captures
syntax for regular expressions (that is C<(?E<lt>nameE<gt>target)>
looks for 'target' and stores the result by name, rather than number
(C<$1>, C<$2>...).

And the inconsistency is that C<(?...)> had always meant that
whatever happened in the "..." part would not result in a capture
but now that's no longer the case. He proposed a change in syntax,
in that named captures use C<+> following the parentheses, which
has a mnemonic C<%+> ring to it, so the syntax would be
C<(+E<lt>nameE<gt>target)>.

Dominic Dunlop argued that Python and PCRE already use C<(?> to
introduce named captures, which means that Perl should do the same.
When Aaron pointed out that Python and PCRE use different syntaxes
to perform named captures, Dominic returned with a patch to make
Perl recognise those syntactic variants as well.

In any event, while the reasoning that led Aaron to the above
conclusion is valid, the syntax is not going to change.

  not this week, at least
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-12/msg00294.html
U
6-on-5 and read only aliasing
http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-12/msg00329.html

Sockets leaking on rapid reconnect?
http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-12/msg00336.html

strange warnings behavior
http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-12/msg00339.html

op/fork.t fails on Win32 since #29543
http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-12/msg00342.html

---Seeking PerlIO refcounting guidance
http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-12/msg00359.html

=head1 Patches of Interest

=head2 Move C<Win32::*> functions from F<win32/win32.c> to F<ext/Win32/Win32.xs>

Michael G. Schwern wanted to know if he could use something simple
to deal with Windows in C<ExtUtils::MakeMaker>. Jan Dubois explained
why it wouldn't work, so Michael suggested using an AUTOLOAD technique
instead, arguing that it would be less surprising for an unsuspecting
user.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-12/msg00256.html

Having had his attention drawn to the code in question, Jan noticed
that there was a flaw in the code, in that perl's internal stack
could be relocated at some point, and made a fix to stop bad things
taking place if it happened. He checked the rest of the codebase
briefly, and thought that Storable might need similar treatment.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-12/msg00233.html

And finally, Jan tweaked F<ext/Win32/Win32.xs> to get it to
compile out of the box on cygwin.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-12/msg00271.html

=head2 Text mode wrongly set on pipe file descriptors

Ilya Zakharevich discovered an old patch he had lying around to sort
out a PerlIO problem. Steve Peters applied it.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-12/msg00305.html

=head2 Fixes for the test suite on OS/2

Ilya also determined that many of the failures he had observed on
OS/2 were in fact false positives, and delivered a patch to clear
up all bar two failures. Rafaël Garcia-Suarez applied all except
the changes to F<getppid.t>, since that test file has changed too
much in C<blead> over the intervening time. He made a note to see
what could be salvaged and added to the current test file.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-12/msg00333.html

=head2 C<Errno> is not rebuilt when C<Config.pm> changes

Yves Orton discovered that C<Errno> depends on certain C<Config>
attributes, such as architecture. If these change, C<Errno> doesn't
realise the fact, and things go downhill from there.

So Yves tweaked the C<Makefile.PL> for C<Errno> to detect the
changes and take the appropriate action.

  If you build it so will they
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-12/msg00364.html

=head1 New and old bugs from RT

=head2 C<IO::Poll::remove()> bug (#7899)

Steve Peters explained that a variant of the proposed patch is now
used in the module.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-12/msg00393.html

=head2 regular expression segfault (#8718)

Steve also explained that, while there was no test data to exercise
the posted bug, given all the work that has gone into the engine, and
all the existing bugs that appear to be similar to this one are
fixed, it's a safe bet to assume that this one is fixed too.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-12/msg00394.html

=head2 Configure: C</usr/bin/df> not found (#8777)

On a roll, Steve checked the Solaris hints for C<Configure>, and
noted that C<df> no longer has a hardwired path.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-12/msg00395.html

=head2 Regexp causing segmentation fault (#10001)

A number of years ago, Hugo van der Sanden suggested a small fix
to resolve this core-dumping bug, but he had doubts as to whether
it would cause other problems. Be that as it may, Steve Peters
observed that an identical change was in fact committed by Dave
Mitchell back in May of this year, so the bug should be resolved.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-12/msg00396.html

=head2 Consult (#21472)

Three years ago Silvio Alberto Ospina Salgado wanted to find out
how to find Perl reference books. A documentation patch was written
at the time by Yitzchak Scott-Thoennes but never applied, but
regardless, the documentation was subsequently rewritten. So Steve
closed the bug.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-12/msg00398.html

Strange interaction between while() and system() on Win32 (#27918)
http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-12/msg00390.html

reading from DATA on win32 with perlio behaves oddly (#28106)
http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-12/msg00389.html

make rebuilds perl every time (#41058)
http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-12/msg00295.html

perl segfaults when map-arguments get freed (#41062)
http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-12/msg00232.html

Out of memory!, while extending scalar with vec() (#41065)
http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-12/msg00230.html

eval CODEREF should work (#41066)
http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-12/msg00236.html

study provokes "should not happen" (#41067)
http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-12/msg00237.html

require stringifies code references in tied @INC (#41071)
http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-12/msg00266.html

infinite loop if strftime fails (#41083)
http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-12/msg00320.html

xsubpp generates wrong line info for included files (#41091)
http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-12/msg00362.html

=head2 Perl5 Bug Summary

With 8 opened and only 3 closed this week, we'll have to wait until
next week to see if we crack the 1500 barrier.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-12/msg00257.html
  http://rt.perl.org/rt3/NoAuth/perl5/Overview.html

=head1 New Core Modules

=over 4

=item *

Versions 1.54 and 1.55 of C<threads> made brief appearances this
week, before being booted off the stage to make room for 1.56.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-12/msg00371.html

=back

=head1 In Brief

Shlomi Fish called everyone's attention to the fact that B<integer
pragmas are not propagated to string C<eval>s in C<perl-5.8.x>>.

  need a hint
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-12/msg00265.html

Jarkko Hietaniemi sent in some more suggestions for F<perlhack.pod>
and also posted the latest cut-and-paste findings he had available.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-12/msg00228.html

He also tweaked an B<C<#ifdef> section in F<mg.c> to factor out>
the invariant code on either side of the conditional.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-12/msg00279.html

Jerrad Pierce fixed B<a usability problem with C<Fatal>>, but didn't know
what the best way was for dealing with core functions that have been
overridden.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-12/msg00231.html

Anton Berezin made B<F<t/op/groups.t> play nicely> on modern FreeBSDs.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-12/msg00302.html

=head2 About this summary

This summary was written by David Landgren.

Weekly summaries are published on F<http://use.perl.org/> and posted
on a mailing list, (subscription: F<perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org>).
The archive is at F<http://dev.perl.org/perl5/list-summaries/>.
Corrections and comments are welcome.

If you found this summary useful, please consider contributing to
the Perl Foundation to help support the development of Perl.
