=head1 This Week on perl5-porters - 18-24 September 2006

If we fake times in our fake stat then fake futimes makes sense.
But chown and chmod make little sense to me - only the current process 
can access the scalar so current UID is owner (and can't exec it).

We could accept the calls and set errno to nearest code that made sense,
or perhaps just set the mode so that fake stat saw it.

Have we missed any more fd related calls?
If there anything else that we can do to filehandles via perl 
interface that we missed?

-- Nick Ing-Simmons, discussing how to improve C<PerlIO::Scalar>,
September 1st, 2006.

=head1 Topics of Interest

=head2 Shrinking the context struct

Nicholas Clark noticed a sly new technique to fiddle around with unions
of structs used for dealing with contexts, which would result in some
memory savings that had the added bonus of bringing the size of the
structure down to 64 bytes in the ILP32 data model.

(ILP32 means that integers, longs and pointers are all 32-bit data types).

So Nicholas applied the change, and then stepped gingerly back from
the keyboard to see what the smoke machines would make of it.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00368.html

=head2 A roadmap for C<MakeMaker> developments

Michael G. Schwern posted his thoughts on what needs to be done to get a
new stable version out the door, as well as future directions, which
includes the desire for a major rewrite of the documentation.

The list appeared to be furious agreement.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00373.html

=head2 C<__attribute__format__(__printf__...> in BSD land

Philip M. Gollucci was having great difficulty in figuring out why gcc
on FreeBSD was stumbling over an C<__attribute__> attribute to the
C<printf> C declaration, and declared it to be a show-stopper for 5.10,
since it breaks mod_perl2.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00387.html

He also supplied the current crop of compiler warnings when compiling C<blead>.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00388.html

=head2 Klocwork

Andy Lester wrote up a report on Klocwork, a source code analysis tool,
comparing it to Coverity, another tool that does the same sort of work.
Jonathon Rockway appeared interested in following up on the issues
uncovered.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00393.html

=head2 sort and 0 returns from comparison routines

Allen Smith posed a most interesting question about sorts, in
relation to genetics, whereby it may be cheap to compare (and thus
order) X and Y, and is comparing Y and Z. But comparing X and Z may
be inconveniently expensive. So he wanted to know if there was a
sort algorithm that allowed one to punt the decision (for instance,
by returning C<undef>), and force the algorithm to use different
comparisons to arrive at a sorted order.

John P. Linderman thought that what Allen really needed was not a
relational sort, but a topological sort, and suggested taking a 
look at C<Sort::Topological>.

  mu
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00514.html

=head2 C++ status report

Jarkko Hietaniemi posted his latest patchwork to get the perl
distribution comping with C++. The two remaining modules that
still cause problems are C<Compress::Zlib> and C<Digest::SHA>.

Part of the problem with C<Compress::Zlib> is that it is
possibly even more widely used than Perl, and its authors are
understandably loathe to give up K&R function signatures. And
it seems the only way to have both K&R and ANSI signatures is
to use horrible #if/#else botches.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00416.html

=head1 Patches of Interest

=head2 Teach regex optimiser how to handle (?=) and (?E<lt>=) properly.

Yves Orton taught us a little more about how he taught the regexp
optimiser to make use of the information available in zero-width
lookahead (and lookbehind) assertions.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00512.html

=head2 Patch for F<win32.c> to fix #38723 and #39531

Andrew Savige and Yves continued to beat this patch into shape.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00386.html

=head2 C<Exporter> documentation

Gabor Szabo suggested adding C<use strict/use warnings/use base> into
the documentation for C<Exporter>. It seemed to rub a number of people
the wrong way.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00462.html

=head1 New and old bugs from RT

=head2 F<XSUB.h> version check may fail due to locale (#37714)

John Peacock supplied a patch to fix this problem in C<blead>, and
promised a new version of C<version> soon.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00366.html

=head2 C<-M> isn't forbidden on the C<#!> line with C<-x> (#38488)

Rafael thought that it would be difficult to resolve this problem in
a sufficiently robust way, mainly because of whitespace issues on the
command line.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00499.html

=head2 C<PL_compiling.cop_warnings> changed structure in 5.8.8? (#40352)

This was a false alarm that Nicholas Clark figured out was because
the code in question was based an incorrect assumption about what
pointer to use.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00404.html

=head2 F<getppid.t> fails, all others tests pass (#40362)

pjm at sanger reported a problem on a Tru64 platform with a test
for the parent pid not working correctly. No takers for the moment.

  millions and millions of pids
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00430.html

=head2 Nested C<for> loops: only internal loop is executed (#40365)

Posting a broken program to a bug-tracker...

  Priceless
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00450.html

=head2 C<File::Find> mishandles non-dangling symlinks (#40369)

Ammon spotted a bug in C<File::Find>'s code, that has probably existed
forever, and fixed it. Steve Peters applied the change.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00450.html

=head2 C<h2xs> enum bug in C<ExtUtils::Constant::WriteConstants> (#40381)

Aaron Dancygier hit a problem with C<enum>s created with C<h2xs>. Steve
Peters thought that the bug had possibly been fixed since, and asked for
a test case. Aaron supplied a tarball.

  Tune in next week
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00481.html

=head2 threads: deadlock occurred on creation of a thread while joining others (#40382)

Tsutomu Ikegami demonstrated how to produce thread deadlocks
(threadlocks?) more or less on demand, and noted that C<blead> was
better but not perfect.  Jerry D. Hedden, having spent an inordinate
amount of time on this issue in the recent past wanted to know if
the fault was still observed when using the latest version (v1.42)
of the C<threads> module. When he tried, everything went swimmingly.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00493.html

=head2 Unexpected empty captured match vars after match (#40384)

Alex Davies demonstrated a bug that exposed some borderline behaviour
with failing C<s///g> matches and capture variables.  Dave Mitchell
noted that the test suite didn't exercise this problem, and wasn't
even sure what the correct behaviour should be anyway.

  And if Dave's not sure...
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00491.html

=head2 C<perl_destruct()> leaks C<PL_main_cv> (#40388) and C<perl_destruct()> leaks C<PL_defstash> (#40389)

Gozer demonstrated two ways to produce leaks, but Andy Dougherty was unable
to recreate them with a fresh copy of C<blead>, and asked Gozer to check and
see whether he still saw the same problems with that.

  The dynamic duo
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00508.html
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00510.html

C<%SIG> isn't cleared during C<perl_shutdown()> (#40390)

Gozer also went on to show that a signal handler may still be
registered during C<perl_shutdown> even though the data structures
for them have been freed. If a signal arrives after this has occurred,
bad things happen.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00509.html

=head2 C<PerlIO::encoding> doesn't handle fallback modes correctly? (#40401)

Steve Hay was trying to bend C<PerlIO::encoding> to do his bidding, but
was not having much luck.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00519.html

=head2 Compiling jpl/PerlInterpreter fails (#40403)

Sakina Suliman was having trouble building the JPL interpreter.

  I guess that's why we pulled it
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00529.html

=head2 C<jpl/Test> failing to run (#40404)

Sakina then managed to get JPL to run anyway, but then ran into
grief a little further on.

  The last JPL user on earth
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00528.html

=head2 C<undef> and C<seek> on filehandles opened to references causes segfaults (#40407)

"buu" discovered that if you open a filehandle to an in-memory scalar,
and then undef the scalar, perl will segfault. While this is probably
a silly thing to do at the best of times, a segfault is perhaps a tad
severe to indicate that it's wrong.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00533.html

=head2 Perl5 Bug Summary

  One less than last week
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00390.html

  Get 'em while they're hot
  http://rt.perl.org/rt3/NoAuth/perl5/Overview.html

=head1 In Brief

The C<SIGSEGV>, C<SIGBUS> and C<SIGILL> B<signals are now delivered
unsafely>, paradoxically, for added safety.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00475.html

David Landgren followed up on a problem posted by Xho Jingleheimerschmidt,
whereby running B<the same program under taint mode doubled the amount
of memory used>. It turned out to be a problem to do with using the
C<x> repetition operator on a list, rather than a scalar. Thus, the
fix was easy, but the reason remains unknown.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00496.html

The B<Mac OS/X / SpamAssassin> problem continued to roll along with
Dominic Dunlop trying to get a handle on the problem. Alas, without
success.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00389.html

Yuval Kogman got caught out by the interpolation of scalar references
in a string and wondered if it was B<a bug or a feature>. It is,
of course, a feature, and C<perlref> was amended to clarify the
fact.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00369.html

Sebastian Steinlechner spotted B<a problem with the ordering of
variable declarations in C<IO::Socket>> and got things straightened
out.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00372.html

Filip Filipov wanted to know B<how to write C<Storable> data files
in Java>, so that Perl could read them. Yuval Kogman thought that
it would be easier to use YAML or something else. C<Storable> is
tied too intimately to Perl's internals to be used easily as an
interchange format.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00429.html

The way perl allocates more memory than immediately (with an eye
to reducing the amount of subsequent reallocations required) was
tweaked slightly for 5.8.8. It turns out that B<this caused a
problem in C<DBD::ODBC>>. But knowing the cause of the problem is
half way to figuring out the solution.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00434.html

The optimisations that Nicholas Clark introduced into inlined
constant subroutines a while back caused B<new warnings to emerge
in C<File::Slurp>'s test suite>. But since the code in question is
somewhat questionable, Nicholas felt that it was working as
advertised.

  Doctor, it hurts when I do this
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00511.html

Yves Orton and Nicholas Clark continued to kick around B<the idea of
a pluggable regexp engine>. Stay tuned for more information next week.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00367.html

Adriano Ferreira added test descriptions to F<lib/File/Copy.t>,

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-09/msg00408.html

=head2 About this summary

This summary was written by David Landgren. According to my records,
last week's summary rolled the total words written past the 100 000
words threshold.

Weekly summaries are published on F<http://use.perl.org/> and posted
on a mailing list, (subscription: F<perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org>).
The archive is at F<http://dev.perl.org/perl5/list-summaries/>.
Corrections and comments are welcome.

If you found this summary useful, please consider contributing to
the Perl Foundation to help support the development of Perl.
