=head1 This Week on perl5-porters - 29 May-4 June 2006

Funnily enough I developed a patch for this exact problem a few days ago.
-- Dave Mitchell, commenting bug #39252

=head1 Topics of Interest

=head2 On un-C<eval>-able code

Peter Valdemar Mørch ran into a curious problem with C<die>ing code, which
when wrapped in an C<eval>, apparently C<die>s as well, however, nothing was
captured in C<$@>. This only occurs when perl runs out of file handles.

Dave Mitchell saw that C<Carp> overwrites C<$@> all by itself if it fails
to load C<Carp::Heavy>, and so he put a stop to that, and also tweaked
F<pp_ctl.c> to deal with running out of file handles in a more
graceful manner.

  Can you handle it
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00948.html

=head2 A better F<DynaLoader.t> with less assumptions

The C<DynaLoader> thread continued to attract a surprising amount of traffic,
with an attempt by Jarkko Hietaniemi to provide a test suite that would
work in a suitably safe cross-platform manner. Craig A. Berry weighed in with
some information on the quirks the VMS brings to the party.

  Dynamight
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00931.html

=head2 Redoing part of change #27374

Back in March, H.Merijn Brand checked in some changes to
F<Porting/checkcfgvar.pl> to teach it about VMS's F<configure.com>.
Abe Timmerman discovered that the DCL code in question doesn't run
too happily on VAX/VMS 7.2 and suggested an improvement, however,
he then saw compiler errors in F<globals.c> due to conflicting
definitions of variables.

Craig A. Berry was happy to see this level of care and attention
being devoted to the VAX, and explained how to debug the problem.
John E. Malmberg also provided some information on how to trace
back from the error message to the source (which involves a
certain amount of unwinding of included header files).

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00970.html

=head2 C<Pod::Html> not safe with taint mode

Ivan Wills runs the DocPerl project on SourceForge, and noticed that
C<Pod::Html> doesn't play nicely with taint mode, due to its internal
caching mechanism calling C<getcwd()>, and wondered what to do about it.

  DocPerl
  http://docperl.sourceforge.net/

  The p5p thread
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00036.html

=head2 Documenting how the regexp engine works

Having spent a fair amount of time under the hood of the regular
expression engine recently, Yves Orton started to document his
understanding of how it works, and asked for feedback. Several
people made some suggestions.

Notably, Dave Mitchell wanted the documentation to make it clear
that it was a  "this is sort of how it works, more or less, today,
maybe a bit" type document, and not something that people could
construe as a guarantee, and therefore use it as an API, forever
condemning the future porters to maintaining the behaviour in a
compatible manner.

Marvin Humphrey hoped that the information provided would be
sufficient for an XS author to figure out how to execute a
regular expression directly from C.

  First cut
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00039.html

Yves rolled the suggestions into his prose, and delivered a new
version.

  Second cut
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00062.html

=head2 Using the Aho-Corasick pattern matching algorithm

Yves then shipped a masterful patch, to add another alternative
for the engine to use to find matches. The fact that he dared delve
into C<intuit_start> deserves a round of applause. But before people
could do anything, Yves withdrew the patch, having spotted a way
to improve it.

  It ain't done until it's done
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00033.html

=head2 What are legal characters inside C<$(xxxx)>?

John E. Malmberg wanted to know what C<$(xxxx)> could be expected to contain,
since it turns out that on an OpenVMS ODS-5 filesystem, C<./$(xxxx)> is a
perfectly valid filename, and he was worried that Perl would try to
interpret in odd ways, or rather, a C<make>-like utility might have a bit
of trouble with it.

Craig A. Berry responded, saying that he thought that John had stumbled
across a weird interaction between Perl and VMS's DCL parsing and macro
expansion, and wanted to know where and why the problem arose.

John explained that, while the system had worked adequately up until now,
the advent of ODS-5 filesystems changes things somewhat, and he wanted
to see how a Unix filename encoded in UTF-8 would be handled in this
brave new world.

  In a desert on a file with no name
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00018.html

=head2 C<tied> scalar references (aren't)

Dave Mitchell reported a problem that had surfaced on Perlmonks,
in that when a reference is tied, after the first call to C<FETCH()>,
the code in C<pp_entersub> and C<pp_rv2sv> have code that accidentally
on purpose short-circuits C<FETCH> from being called again, thus
stopping the usual C<tie> mechanism from operating.

Nicholas Clark considered the issue, and concluded that while the
current behaviour was broken, and that it while it was clear what
the correct behaviour should look like, fixing it would not be easy.

The problem is that magic needs to be invoked only once when reading
or writing a variable. For ordinary scalars, this works fine, but
for references, it doesn't work, because there is nowhere to squirrel
away the necessary flag to determine whether or not to invoke magic.
And if fixing it means that magic might get called twice, the result
is likely to be even worse than failing to calling it once.

  By the pricking of my thumbs
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00025.html

=head1 Watching the smoke signals

=head2 Smoke [5.9.4] 28316 FAIL(F) openvms V8.2 (Alpha/3cpu)

This failure, on one of Abe Timmerman's boxes, was caused by
C<Compress::Zlib>'s test suite, and for some reason, a scalar that
was supposed to be holding the name of a file in which to capture
C<STDERR> was empty. Paul Marquess asked for the verbose output of
the tests, so see what was going wrong.

Nicholas Clark wondered whether the tests would fail in a similar
fashion if the variable held a single newline character, as he
recalled that on VMS, newlines will sometimes wind up where Unix
people wouldn't expect to find them. Craig A. Berry ran the tests
on some other equipment, but couldn't reproduce the failures. On
the other hand, he did notice that F<autosplit.ix> might be not
wind up in the right place.

  Up in smoke
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00978.html

=head1 New and old bugs from RT

=head2 More on memory leaks from C<eval "sub { \$foo = 22 "> (#37231)

Nicholas Clark thanked Dave Mitchell for the C<eval> leak plugging,
and reported that the only way he was able to make perl leak on bad
code was with C<1; use abc> and a downright evil C<BEGIN {$^H{a}++};
1; use 6>.

Dave Mitchell scoffed at this feeble attempt and added a
C<SAVEDESTRUCTOR_X> function to deal with cleaning up the parse
stack if it fails prematurely. He was brave enough to announce that
that should be the end of the C<eval> leaks.

  The holey grail
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00907.html

=head2 More on C<readline> of a non-newline-terminated last line results in C<Bad file descriptor> (#39060)

Mark Martinec reported this problem early May. Andreas Koenig moved
the issue forward by using his binary-chop compilation technique
to trace the problem back to a change made by Jarkko in 2003.

  Being silently happy
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00038.html

=head2 More on numeric comparison operands not treated consistently (#39062)

Andreas then wheeled the time machine out again, this time isolating the
problem to a patch from Gurusamy Sarathy in 2000. In doing so, he discovered
that an easy work-around consists of adding C<$Data::Dumper::Useperl=1>,
which makes the problem go away (that is, use the pure-Perl rather than XS
version).

He also slimmed the test case down to reveal the peculiar differences
between left and right operands in numeric comparisons more clearly.

  Not your usual number
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00035.html

=head2 Failure not always detected in C<IPC::Open2::open2> resolved (#39127)

Dave tightened up the documentation, and made the code deal correctly
with C<exec> failures.

  There's always IPC::Run
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00026.html

By a strange coincidence, "xdrudis", doing his work at tinet, was dealing
with the same job. He had built an elaborate bug report to suggest a number
of ways of handling it. Dave dealt with it in change #28347.

  The head was never found
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00997.html

=head2 C<IO::Socket::connect> returns wrong C<errno> on timeout resolved (#39178)

Steve Peters applied the fix that suggested in the bug report.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00016.html

=head2 Panic opt close (#39233)

Johan Vromans found that C<m/(?:(\w\w){2}){8}/> cause perl to panic with a
C<Panic opt close in regex>. David Landgren found that an even simpler
pattern, C<m/(?:(a){1})?/>, would also do the trick.

  No idea why, though
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00952.html

=head2 Core dump in C<Storable::store> (#39246)

Mark-Jason Dominus managed to provoke C<Storable> into dumping core, by
using it as a backing cache for his C<Memoize> module.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00982.html

Steve Peters identified this problem as being related to, or a duplicate of,
bug #21436.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00010.html

=head2 C<defined>-ness of substrings disappear over repeated calls (#39247)

Martin at datacash discovered a problem with substrings in subroutines
losing their C<pPOK>, which can lead to all sorts of bad things,
the least of which being scalars passed to C<DBD::Mysql> being
treated as C<NULL> when they are not.

Sadahiro Tomoyuki determined that change #20462, designed to fix
bug #23207, was the origin of the problem.  He was puzzled, however,
since when he reverted the change, while this fixed up Martin's
immediate problem, the original problem that that patch was meant to
fix didn't manifest itself. Which would mean it was fixed by another
unrelated patch.

  A twisty maze of changes, all alike
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00985.html

On the other hand, when Martin did the same, the problem did show
up, which made him wonder a bit, until Tomoyuki explained that the
newly-unmasked bug shows up on 5.9.0, but no longer on versions
5.9.1 through 5.9.3. He also found the source of confusion: bug #24816,
which was fixed in blead with #22074, and later backported as change
#27391 in the maintenance track, solves both problems and thus #20462
can well and truly be reverted.

  Confused yet?
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00000.html

All this made Martin wonder whether C<DBD::Mysql> should be taking more
care with what gets passed to it, specifically, testing for magic as
well as C<SvOK>, which would make it more robust.

Tomoyuki thought that perl's internals are far too complicated for
XS authors to be expected to deal with in all circumstances, and that
a better solution in the present case would be to store the substring
into a temporary scalar and pass that, instead of passing the substring
directly.

  Substrings are deeply magical
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00023.html

=head2 F<handy.h> does not guard against being C<#include>d twice (#39251)

Gabriel Nazar noticed that F<handy.h> doesn't have the
C<#ifdef>/C<#define>/C<#endif> trick to stop the compiler from going
bananas when it gets included more than once. H.Merijn Brand wanted
to know what circumstances led to this happening in the first place.

  I want handy
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00995.html

=head2 C<stat()> doesn't work on dirhandles (#39261)

Mark-Jason Dominus posted a short snippet that showed how you
can't C<stat> a handle opened by C<opendir>, and get anything
useful back. Peter Dintelmann thought that C<stat> was documented
as not doing anything useful with directory handles.

Steve Peters had some code on the back-burner that could deal
with this issue, and others, so he dusted it off to see what
could be done.

  Would be handy
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00019.html

=head2 Perl make failure on hpux system (#39269)

Brian Shields was having a considerable difficulty in compiling
a version of Perl for HP-UX, which boiled down to getting C<ndbm>
and/or C<gdbm> working correctly.

Dominic Dunlop tried to explain what was going wrong, and the
steps Brian should take to get everything working. H.Merijn
pointed to his HP-UX repository, where Brian might be able to
find some binary packages for the stuff he needed.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00034.html

  The HP-UX repo
  http://hpux.connect.org.uk/

=head2 Perl5 Bug Summary

Two less bugs this week than last week. Next stop, 1300.

  10 opened - 12 closed = 1488
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00955.html

  And the rest of the gang
  http://rt.perl.org/rt3/NoAuth/perl5/Overview.html

=head1 New Core Modules

=over 4

=item *

C<Encode> version 2.18 released by Dan Kogai, the Encode maintainer.

Ruud Affijn pointed to an NNTP article about unexpected encoding
behaviour, but the summariser has unexpected decoding troubles in
trying to read it.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00049.html

=back

=head1 In Brief

Jarkko Hietaniemi tweaked F<t/op/incfilter.t> to B<play nicely when doing the
C<make clean; make miniperl; make minitest>> dance,

  Edit, compile, run
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00950.html

and also B<gave C<PerlIO_cleanup()> the responsibility of freeing
C<PL_perlio_fd_refcnt>>, since nothing else appeared to be doing
so.

  A dirty job, but someone's gotta do it
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00944.html

Yves Orton (re)?discovered that B<C is not Perl and C<AV>s don't
just magically free themselves>.

  DWIM, dammit!
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg00975.html

Jarkko Hietaniemi posted a link to, and wondered if B< anyone tried
the Open Watcom compilers>.  Steve Peters said that he had had a
brief look in the past and had got as far as figuring out what
C<make> command to use, and then ran out of tuits.

  What compiles
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00001.html

Andreas Koenig noticed B<a couple of files missing from F<MANIFEST>>
relating to test files.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00002.html

Brendan O'Dea figured out what the problem was with Debian mis-packaging perl
which caused B<C<List::Util> to end up lacking a shared object file>. Rafael
applied Brendan's fix.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-05/msg01001.html

Juerd Waalboer delivered B<an updated version of C<perlunitut>>, a tutorial
on dealing with Unicode in Perl, and this was added to C<blead> by Rafael.

  Unicode redecoded
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00007.html

He also pinged the list again about B<an issue with C<Encode> and
C<encoding>>, to see if anyone had some ideas on the matter. Johan
Vromans seemed quite taken with the concept (of what to do when
both source I<and> destination use different encodings). Rafael
thought that patches would be nice.

  Scratch that itch
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00024.html

Daniel Frederick Crisman took another stab at B<three minor fixes
related to C<perlop>>. Rafael thought that the first fix fixed
something that wasn't broken, that the second dealt with a file
that was auto-generated (perhaps meaning that the source document
needs to be patched instead), and that the third fix had POD errors.

  podchecker is your friend
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00048.html

Sadahiro Tomoyuki gave B<F<perlunicode.pod> a workover> to improve the
narrative. Applied by Rafael.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00053.html

Jarkko found that his AIX compiler had considerable trouble with
B<an C<#ifdef> inside a macro definition>, and sought a way to fix
it.  This wasn't as simple as first thought, and at the end John
E. Malmberg pointed out how things could still go wrong on OpenVMS
when using Bash.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00054.html

He also noticed that B<F<pp_ctl.c> uses Latin-1 characters> (or in
any event, ASCII characters beyond 127), which would also be a
portability issue.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00061.html

And finally, Jarkko noted some weird errors with tests under C<ext/B>,
which Abe Timmerman thought was probably due to B<C<Test::Smoke>
not keeping up with the changes to C<Test::Harness>>. Smokers were
advised to upgrade their smoking implements.

  Stick that in your pipe
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00055.html

=head2 About this summary

This summary was written by David Landgren.

Last week's summary still had Philip M. Gollucci wondering if he
was doing something dumb with C<Perl_croak> and C<nullch>, or if
there was something else going on.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00032.html

If you want a bookmarklet approach to viewing bugs and change
reports, there are a couple of bookmarklets that you might find
useful on my page of Perl stuff:

  http://www.landgren.net/perl/

Weekly summaries are published on F<http://use.perl.org/> and posted
on a mailing list, (subscription: F<perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org>).
The archive is at F<http://dev.perl.org/perl5/list-summaries/>.
Corrections and comments are welcome.

If you found this summary useful, please consider contributing to
the Perl Foundation to help support the development of Perl.
