=head1 This month on perl5-porters - August 2006

I<"Insistent rumors claim that we used to have Perl compilable
with C++ -- I doubt it a bit, given the kind of problems I found
when doing this latest cleanup work."> -- Jarkko Hietaniemi,
having now found a new wall against which to bang his head.

=head1 Topics of Interest

=head2 Perl 5.9.4 is out

Rafael Garcia-Suarez posted the first draft of the delta that explained
all the new goodies in the latest development release of Perl, 5.9.4.

  perl594delta
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-08/msg00254.html

He made a number of changes based on feedback received.

  perl594delta (take two)
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-08/msg00293.html

And after a second round of feedback, managed to push the tarball out
the hatch.

  Perl 5.9.4 is out
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-08/msg00315.html

=head2 Define C<PERL_NO_DEV_RANDOM> on Windows

Alex Davies noticed that C<perl> attempts to look for F</dev/urandom>
on Win32 platforms, even though that file does not exist. And worse,
you can create it, thereby subverting Perl's randomness. Steve Peters
fixed that up.

  Have you in fact got any cheese here at all?
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-08/msg00087.html

=head2 IBM z/OS Unix source code fixes

Jarkko Hietaniemi wrapped up his heroic endeavour to merge the code
changes that IBM programmers made to a copy of Perl, I<circa> 5.8.7,
to C<blead>. He announced he was stepping down, having left a couple
of parts of the patch unapplied, and explained why. He invited the
IBM programmers to continue the good work, to have Perl running on
z/OS.

  I hear the roar of a big machine
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-08/msg00199.html

=head2 ops needed for C<[]> and C<{}>

Nicholas Clark discovered that a lot of work (lots of ops) are
needed to build a single lousy anonymous hash or array, and wondered
if there wasn't a more efficient way of of making one. He came up
with a patch to change the behaviour (bonus JFDI points to Nicholas)
that simultaneously slimmed down the op-tree, and doesn't break the
test suite. And naturally enough, he wanted to know whether people
thought this was a good idea.

Jim Cromie ran a few benchmarks and found some measurable
improvements.

  Special ops
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-08/msg00394.html

=head2 C99 is not compilable ... where?

Dropping in from Parrot, Chip Salzenberg wanted to know if any
porters knew of a platform far, far away that did not have a
C99-capable compiler.

Nicholas Clark mentioned C<gcc>, for starters. Andy Dougherty had
some good advice. Tony Cook pointed out that Microsoft don't seem
very interested in providing support for C99 features, unless they
happen to also be C++-compatible. Chip said some naughty words.

  Just about everywhere else
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-08/msg00427.html

=head2 Ponie has been put out to pasture

Jesse Vincent announced the end of the Ponie project, the migration
of the Perl 5 core to use the Parrot VM. A number of other techniques
are currently under development to have Perl 5 code running inside
Perl 6, and much good came out of the project in terms of clean-ups
to the code base.

  They shoot horses, don't they?
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-08/msg00491.html

=head1 Patches of Interest

Numerous small patches that were applied quietly without fuss, or
withdrawn by the author are not included in this section (it's big
enough as it is).

=head2 Patching for g++

Jarkko Hietaniemi checked in a large body of work to make the
code base compile with g++, the GNU C++ compiler.

First some g++ goodness for Tru64

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-08/msg00076.html

And then a large patch for everyone, which nearly almost works,
but significant smoking will be required, if only to get the
kinks ironed out on some of the more common platforms.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-08/msg00093.html

At this point, Jarkko rolled up a patch that succeeded as getting as
far as completing C<make perl>, although C<x2p> and a few extensions
don't build. Steve Peters carried the baton and tidied up a few of
the easier modules, although a couple needed more thought.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-08/msg00154.html

Jarkko then puzzled for a bit over how to get C linkage back out
again at the end of it, so that things would work as before. All
this fuss made him suspect that the source probably never was
compilable with a C++ compiler. Still, it might in the near future.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-08/msg00225.html

He even managed to make C<x2p> work.

  doubleplusgood
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-08/msg00422.html

=head2 Adding XE<lt>E<gt> tags to the documentation

Gabor Szabo delivered some patches to add XE<lt>E<gt> tags (for indexing)
to the core documentation and also snuck in a few stylistic changes while
no-one was looking (although it warranted a comment from Rafael).

  File::Spec
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-08/msg00111.html

  File::Basename
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-08/msg00112.html

  perlvar
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-08/msg00119.html

=head2 More portability pitfalls for C<perlhack>

Jarkko jotted down some more nuggets of wisdom acquired over the years
of doing battle with unfriendly compilers.

  Here be dragons
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-08/msg00239.html

=head2 Silence format and comparison warnings in F<perlio.c>, F<pp.c> and  F<regcomp.c>

Robin Barker sent in a patch to silence many warnings of signed/unsigned
mismatches. Hooray! Applied.

  ttys everywhere rejoiced
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-08/msg00495.html

=head2 Detecting bad F</dev/null>s in C<Configure>

Michael Cummings, from Gentoo, proposed a patch to make C<Configure>
smarter about F</dev/null>, which may not always be configured
correctly, especially in chrooted environments, and by the time
this causes a problem, the build may already be quite some way down
the track (and thus the original cause of the error may be hard to
diagnose. "Missing Separator" errors may not seem crystal clear.
Alexey Toptygin proposed a tweak. A new patch was proposed.
Unapplied.

  Go directly to jail
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-08/msg00515.html

=head1 Watching the smoke signals

=head2 Smoke [5.9.4] 28730 FAIL(F) OSF1 V5.1 (EV6/4 cpu)

Things in F<lib/strict.t>, F<lib/subs.t> and F<t/run/fresh_perl.t> seemed
to be going pear-shaped, but appeared to be a Heisenbug, since Jarkko
wasn't able to reproduce the errors manually.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-08/msg00327.html

=head2 Smoke [5.9.4] 28736 FAIL(F) OSF1 V5.1 (EV6/4 cpu)

The pain persisted, so in the morning, Jarkko went to the ice-rink to
see if Dave Mitchell was around. Nicholas Clark made the connection to
the work on plugging leaks on unevaluable code, realising that that
may be causing problems here. Dave professed to not having many tuits
at the moment.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-08/msg00379.html

=head1 New and old bugs from RT

=head2 C<*FILE{IO}> does not behave like C<*FILE> for C<stat()> and C<-X()> operators (#8244)

Andy Dougherty revived an old bug that rose to the surface after a
Coverity scan. Rafael applied a quick fix.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-08/msg00200.html

=head2 isa cache leaks into and out of C<Safe> compartments (#39887)

Rafael asked for some test cases to draw the bug out into the open,
where it may more easily be stamped out.

  Here buggy buggy
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-08/msg00170.html

=head2 C<B::Deparse> double C<do> (#40055)

Nicholas Clark wondered why C<do{}> was deparsed as C<do[ do{} }>.
Rick Delaney provided the fix.

  Deep do do
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-08/msg00081.html

=head2 UTF-8 keys in a tied hash cause warning (#40067)

Apparently not so much a bug as an unsupported feature.

  It's always done that
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-08/msg00098.html

=head2 Memory leak in C<Perl_newPMOP()> under C<USE_ITHREADS> (#40077)

A discussion at Perlmonks revealed a ref-counting memory leak. No takers.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-08/msg00105.html

=head2 C<perlfaq6> example is wrong: pull out lines between two patterns (#40084)

Max Maischein saw a flaw in a perlfaq example (where the two patterns
appear on different lines). The only fix he could think of involved the
arcane C<m??>. Rick Delaney offered a suggestion.

  This question frequently asked?
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-08/msg00117.html

=head2 C<Data::Dumper> with C<Sortkeys> performs incomplete hash traversal (#40088)

Peter S. Shenkin provided a short snippet showing how a hash would
be not be completely traversed when the C<Sortkeys> setting was
active (but the example I<was> using C<each> too). And it appears
fixed in 5.8.8 anyway.

  ENOTABUG, I assume
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-08/msg00116.html

=head2 File::Spec-E<gt>case_tolerant() should return true on Cygwin (#40103)

G. Paulissen explained why this should be so. No takers.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-08/msg00142.html

=head2 Using wrong case on module should warn (#40131)

Ben Tilly suggested that a warning should be issued if a module is
specified with incorrect capitalisation (on a filesystem with
case-insensitive semantics), reasoning that while C<use Strict>
might work Here, it certainly won't work There.

Rafael noted that it turns out that there used to be such a warning,
but it was removed because of false positives.

  Can't please everyone, all the time
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-08/msg00178.html

=head2 Perl 5 Errors on Windows 2003 (#40134)

Steve Hay awarded Subba Valisetty a golden crown for have filed the
most utterly useless bug report ever[TM]. Nicholas Clark was gentler,
and offered a pointer to a tutorial on how to file good bug reports.

  Gong!
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-08/msg00181.html

=head2 Problem compiling perl 5.9.3 (#40141)

Pierre posted an excerpt of a failing compilation (F<pp_sys.c> dying an
agonising death). Steve Hay asked for the output of the F<myconfig> script.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-08/msg00202.html

=head2 C<warnings::warnif> is sometimes ignored (#40144)

Wiles showed how to make C<warnings::warnif> misbehave. No takers.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-08/msg00203.html

=head2 C<make> fails for perl 5.8.8 build on AIX5.3 (#40155)

Graham Stokes was having compiling 5.8.8 for AIX 5.3. Fortunately,
he was smart enough to supply F<myconfig>. Steve Hay suggested using
C<ld> (linker) from the GNU C<binutils> package, rather than AIX's
C<ld>. Andy Dougherty also provided some advice on fixing locale
warnings.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-08/msg00333.html

=head2 C<ccversion> fix for HP/UX (#40161)

An anonymous porter, possibly using the HP testdrive facility,
filed a fix for the HP/UX hints file. Applied.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-08/msg00329.html

=head2 Problem C<join()>ing threads (#40168)

Jonathan Geisler had a problem with threads, that Jerry D. Hedden
thought was probably fixed in the latest versions of C<threads>
available on CPAN, and made a couple of suggestions to the code as
posted. Johnathon thanked him for the courtesy, and pointed out
that one of the snippets in question was lifted directly from
C<perlthrtut>.

  So that's the bug
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-08/msg00330.html

=head2 Unable to use C<DProf> with threads (#40170)

Jonathan also joined the long list of people who had found limitations
with C<Devel::DProf> in its current incarnation. Any takers?

  A call to tuits
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-08/msg00332.html

Solaris: BEGIN and C<exec>, C<fork>, C<system> or C<open(|-,-|)> (#40190)

Gary Vollink discovered some Solaris wackiness, involving C<use warnings
FATAL =E<gt> 'all'>, systems and/or backticks failing, and code blocks then
being evaluated and executed twice (when once would be ample).

Nicholas Clark remembered this emergent behaviour cropping up in other
contexts, and thought that it was something to do with the Unix file
descriptor being diddled in the parent when the child dies.

  Solaris: you are awful, but I like you
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-08/msg00343.html

=head2 C<grep> autovivifies hash elements (#40194)

Marc Lehmann wondered why grepping a value against a hash key causes
the hash key to spring into existence. David Nicol thought that Marc
should have been using C<exists>. chromatic supplied a much clearer
pair of snippets to show what Marc was trying to get at. And yes, it's
quite counter-intuitive, broken, and nearly impossible to fix. David
still had trouble understanding, and Benjamin Carter (who writes from
a domain with a most excellent name) explained in more detail about
aliasing of C<$_> and the creation or not of hash keys.

  Weird science
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-08/msg00358.html

=head2 Small typo in C<perlxstut> man page (#40197)

Ville Koskinen explained the difference between ensure and insure. Applied.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-08/msg00363.html

=head2 UTF-16 and regular expressions causes compilation failure (#40203)

Ian Goodacre had a problem with regular expressions trying to match
characters coming out of a UTF-16-encoded file, specifically, an
unrecognised BOM 7061. No takers.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-08/msg00381.html

=head2 C<< E<lt>E<gt> >> as glob in scalar context and interpolated variables (#40213)

Dakkar filed a report about using C<< E<lt>E<gt> >> as a glob in
scalar context and interpolated variables and how iterators were
not reset and even added a test case. No takers. Perhaps the fact
that the test was tarred and bzipped scared away potential fixers.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-08/msg00467.html

=head2 C<SelfLoader::croak> doesn't protect C<$@> from being clobbered by C<require> (#40216)

Bo Lindbergh filed a bug report so clear that Adriano Ferreira felt that
he could fix it. So he did. Applied.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-08/msg00471.html

=head2 'reserved' warning not working (#40227)

Jerry D. Hedden discovered a problem with C<use warnings 'reserved'> not
working correctly. Rafael made an oblique explanation as to why, but I was
not able to determine whether he was pointing out that the error was in
Jerry's test case or in Perl.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-08/msg00490.html

They both seemed to understand each other, for an additional patch later
on got things sorted out.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-08/msg00527.html

=head2 New hints file for MidnightBSD (#40239)

Lucas Holt tweaked the FreeBSD hints file, to derive a new hints file
that allows perl 5.8.8 to build successfully on MidnightBSD. Unapplied.

  Another platform added to the roster
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-08/msg00531.html

=head2 C<PerlIO::scalar> doesn't know how to truncate (#40241)

Bo Lindbergh wanted C<truncate> to work on strings. Rafael looked
at the implementation and saw that it only works for file handles
at the moment. Any takers?

  Your chance for fame and glory
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-08/msg00536.html

=head2 C<Math::BigInt> silently drops lib argument if not available (#40242)

You can import C<Math::Bigint>
and tell it to use an underlying library to do the biginty calculations.
But if you type the name incorrectly, it silently loads a couple
of default libraries and never complains that anything is wrong.
Andreas König thought this behaviour less than desirable. He felt
that the script should die, so that the programmer could fix the
error.

The problem is that if this was changed now, it might break programs
of people who were living happily in ignorance that their BigInt
calculations were not in fact using GMP or Pari as they had thought,
but rather the default Calc and Fastcalc libraries, simply because
they had accidently typed "Gimp" or "Paris".

Allen Smith felt that since this was the first time in four years
that someone had questioned the existing behaviour, it maybe wasn't
so bad after all. Tels offered a snippet of sanity checking boilerplate
to do what Andreas wanted.

  You might find you get what you need
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-08/msg00537.html

=head2 Interesting variation on 'Out of memory' (#40243)

Andreas also posted a bug on rampant memory usage, that can be slimmed
down by using temporaries, which in turn allows the garbage collector
to fire off more readily, keeping consumption to a minimum.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-08/msg00538.html

=head2 Perl5 Bug Summary

Around 21 new tickets were created this month, and alas, only 8
were closed, bringing the current total to 1519. Hopefully after
the summer lull Steve will be able to get that figure down under
1500 again. And if a couple of people pitched in to help, we could
bring it down lower, and faster.

  Over to you
  http://rt.perl.org/rt3/NoAuth/perl5/Overview.html

=head1 New Core Modules

=over 4

=item *

John Peacock uploaded version 0.67 of C<version> to correct the problem
that Ovid spotted of version 0.000001 not being understood.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-08/msg00172.html

=item *

Dave Rolsky synced C<blead> with C<Time::Local> version 1.13 from CPAN.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-08/msg00184.html

=item *

C<Module::Load> became part of the core distribution.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-08/msg00187.html

=item *

C<Package::Constants> also became part of the core distribution.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-08/msg00244.html

=item *

A proposal was made to add C<Locale::Maketext::Simple> to the core,
however, as far as I can see, it was not added. The fact that the
module is not licensed under the Artistic or GPL licenses (rather,
the MIT license), may have something to do with it.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-08/msg00251.html

=item *

C<Module::Loaded> also made it into the core, but sparked off a certain
amount of debate as to whether it offered I<enough> functionality.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-08/msg00258.html

=item *

After having too much fun compiling perl with g++, Jarkko still found time
to get release C<Time::HiRes> version 1.88 to CPAN.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-08/msg00463.html

=back

=head1 In Brief

Rich Rauenzahn suggested a tweak to determining the B<HP-UX compiler
version> in the F<Policy> file.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-08/msg00088.html

Nicholas Clark posted a long reply about B<the difference between
Python's and Perl's threads>, and why Perl's threads are unlikely
to mesh nicely with a CORBA implementation.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-08/msg00120.html

Brendan O'Dea, from the world of debian, wondered whether B<what was
wrong with C<setlocale()>> was an implementation or a documentation
problem.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-08/msg00213.html

Alexandre Jousset wrote in to explain B<how to cross compile Perl
for the TomTom GO 910>. Rafael updated a config file to take account
of the information.

  Is that a telephone or an MP3 player?
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-08/msg00214.html

Even though he's left us, we are not forgotten. Andy Lester CC'ed
the list on his essay about B<why consting is good>.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-08/msg00245.html

Ben Morrow suggested B<adding all keywords to C<perlfunc>>. And rather
just moaning about how nice it would be, actually sent in the patch
that documented a slew of things, like C<can>, C<DESTROY> and so forth.
Unapplied, but it has certain merits.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-08/msg00246.html

Marc Lehmann uncovered a way to make B<perl with C<-DPERL_DONT_CREATE_GVSV>>
dump core. Nicholas wasn't sure of the reason.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-08/msg00444.html

Gerard Goossen came up with a test case for a B<C<substr> with
lvalue refcount increment bug>, but no-one was sure what to do about
it. At least, Dave Mitchell didn't know.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-08/msg00502.html

=head2 About this summary

This summary was written by David Landgren.

If you want a bookmarklet approach to viewing bugs and change
reports, there are a couple of bookmarklets that you might find
useful on my page of Perl stuff:

  http://www.landgren.net/perl/

Weekly summaries are published on F<http://use.perl.org/> and posted
on a mailing list, (subscription: F<perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org>).
The archive is at F<http://dev.perl.org/perl5/list-summaries/>.
Corrections and comments are welcome.

If you found this summary useful, please consider contributing to
the Perl Foundation to help support the development of Perl.
