=head1 This Week on perl5-porters - 3-9 July 2006

I<"CPAN is an unorganised anarchy. The checksum only guarantees that your
downloaded file is identical to the one on CPAN, but there's no
guarantee whatsoever that the file on CPAN is sane.">
-- Johan Vromans, reflecting upon the joys of open source software.

=head1 Topics of Interest

=head2 Is Perl an itch-free zone?

Following on from the thread following on from the unfinished summary
of a couple of weeks ago, Nicholas Clark wanted to know if the Perl
engineering process was too good for itself. With a dedicated crew
of smokers, a fanatical attention to backwards compatibility, there
is very little that an average author of CPAN modules has to worry
about. If you have a module that works on 5.6 and 5.8, it is just
about certain that it will work just fine on 5.10 as well.

This is not the case for other languages, like Java, PHP or Python,
where things may change radically from release to release, and the
hapless programmer just has to deal with it.

Scott Walters offered a certain amount of conjecture as to why
things are the way the are (hint: it's got something to do with
money). He then put forward a few items that he thinks about from
time to time: fast bytecode loading, better coroutine support in
the core and a bit of syntactic sugar for object-oriented programming.

Nicholas Clark thought that the lower bound of success for byte
loading was to work with any Perl code you care to throw at it, and
figuring out the upper bound of how long I<that> would take seemed
rather too high to be reasonable. Coroutine support in the core was
reasonable: it requires adding more hooks in the interpreter that
authors could grab hold of, and this can only be a good thing in
terms of the innovation it might allow to spring forth.

Scott came back later on with some interesting information on how
Python works. In a nutshell, it's still pretty much Guido's baby.

Jan Dubois chipped in to say that Tcl has a superb API to its
internals, and you cannot sneak past it from extensions. This has
permitted all Tcl extensions to be backwards and forwards compatible
across the entire 8.x release series. This makes Jan very envious.

[background info: on #p5p a few weeks ago there was a discussion
about the fact that most of the core developers know the guts of
perl so well that they unconsciously play to its strengths and skirt
around its weaknesses to the extent that there do not appear to be
a whole lot of itches left, in their eyes.]

  The state of play
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00116.html

In a similar thread, Nicholas pointed to the absence of feedback
from Perl users to the core developers. If CPAN authors out there
have wishlists of things that would make their lives easier, it's
not being channelled back to C<perl5-porters>.

Similarly, the release candidates leading up to a new minor release
get next to no testing, about from the usual band of smokers. This
means that anything truly I<interesting> that changes in the
interpreter remains unnoticed up until after a release, which is
what we want to avoid in the first place.

So, if I<you> have an XS module, or an C<Acme> module that does
weird things, take a maintenance snapshot for a spin on your code
and see how it fares. If you don't have any, try some of Damian's
modules. Or those of the Phalanx.

  Nicholas Clark wants *you*
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00041.html

=head2 CPAN-ifying C<Math::Complex> and C<Math::Trig>

Jarkko Hietaniemi pondered dual-lifing C<Math::Complex> and
C<Math::Trig> as CPAN packages, the idea being to be able to backport
bug fixes and new functionality to previous Perl releases.

Dan Kogai was very enthusiastic about the idea, and hinted that it
would be wonderful if C<Math::Complex> were a little more C<bignum>
aware.

  Playing the numbers
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00077.html

=head2 CPAN and security

There was a rather long thread about CPAN. It's apparently broken,
so people are discussing how CPAN-for-Perl6 will make it better.
The evil-author-uploads-rootkit was mentioned. (Summariser's
note: I do not mean to disparage this thread, it's just I feel
that p5p is not the best place to discuss it).

  Read the source
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00087.html

=head2 Itanium warnings for C<Compress::Zlib>

H.Merijn Brand sent in a list of warnings when C<Compress::Zlib> is
compiled on the Itanium platform. Paul Marquess initially hoped to
steal ideas from the new 2.0 codebase, but H.Merijn quashed that
idea.

So Paul had a closer look. One problem arose from the C<MEM_WRAP_CHECK>
macro, and Paul had next to no idea about what to do about that. Another
warning was from the C<zlib> source itself. The remaining warnings were
from his own code, so Paul set about seeing what he do to silence them.

At the same time, he mentioned that this would be close to last ever
release of the 1.x series, and that 2.x could start to move out of
beta.

Paul then had a closer look at the C<MEM_WRAP_CHECK> macro and isolated
what he thought was the offending construct. It turns out that Yves
Orton had already run into the problem last month:

  Compilers of very little brane
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-06/msg00919.html

and it had prompted Nicholas Clark to opine that what really needs
to be done is for compiler writers to add a -STFU switch to their
wares. Andy Lester mentioned that he had given it his best shot
some time ago at silencing the warnings. Paul debated the idea of
generating an ideal macro at configure-time, but the more he
thought about, he couldn't see how to avoid a picky compiler
moaning about C<comparison always false>.

  The ideal copy
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00171.html

=head2 Itanium warnings for C<Unicode::Normalize> 1.01

And if the above wasn't enough, H.Merijn continued his quest to win
friends and influence enemies by putting C<Unicode::Normalize> through
the Itanium wringer.

  It's all good
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00164.html

=head2 Escapes in heredocs

Curtis "Ovid" Poe wondered if he had misunderstood how backslashes
behave in single-quoted heredocs, and wondered if he had misread
the documentation, or whether the documentation was wrong, or unclear.

Sadahiro Tomoyoki cited C<perlop> chapter and verse, where it says
that in single-quoted heredocs, no interpolation is performed, so
the snippet Ovid posted was working as advertised. Yves had a shot
at improving the documentation, but Tomoyuki poked a hole in it.

  Heredoc, there a doc
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00241.html

=head1 Patches of Interest

=head2 Autogenerate all F<ppport.h> files

Marcus Holland-Moritz produced a patch to generate all F<ppport.h>
files automatically during the build process. He asked for some
feedback from Win32 and VMS porters. Steve Hay reported that it
seemed fine on Win32.  Craig Berry filed a small tweak for VMS, and
explained what the problem was regarding C<Config_heavy.pl>, which
does not show up on other platforms. This prompted Marc to change
the way C<mkppport> behaves, since if it poses a problem for VMS,
it may pose similar problems on other, more esoteric, platforms.

  It's a job for Perl!
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00080.html

After having received the above feedback, Marcus announced that all
C<ppport.h> files were now being generated automatically by C<mkppport>
on Linux, VMS, Win32 and cygwin, and that any remaining bugs should get
smoked out on other platforms soon. The end result is 160Kb saved in the
C<bzip2> tarball, and/or 150Kb for the C<gzip> tarball.

Nicholas Clark pondered what else would look nice shaved. After toying
with the idea of autogenerating some tests, it was decided that there
are no more easy savings to be had.

  use less 'disk';
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00246.html

C<Sys::Syslog> also acquired its own F<ppport.h>.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00247.html

=head2 Dual life for C<Shell.pm>

Adriano Ferreira discovered in horror that C<Shell.pm> uses string C<eval>s
to achieve its nefarious ends, and worse, is indented with tabs. So he
proposed a new version that uses closures, and changed the tabs to spaces.

Rafael complained that the spaces/tabs change added a lot of noise to the
C<diff>, so Adriano redid the work as two separate patches.

  The modern world
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00145.html

=head2 C<const>ing, End of Part I

Andy Lester added some consting and localizing to F<universal.c>

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00081.html

and F<toke.c>.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00082.html

Andy announced that he was going to scale back operations on Perl
5 and move to Parrot. Mainly, because most of the low-hanging fruit
on the Perl 5 source tree has been harvested, and also because
Parrot could do with some help.

  Moving on
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00197.html

=head2 C<state> variables

Rafael Garcia-Suarez filed a status report on the current situation
of C<state> variables. He mentioned one problem remaining was what
happens with declarations of C<state> variables in list assignments.

Rick Delaney thought that about it and suggested what he thought the
right thing to do was, but it turns out that Rafael spoke to Larry
Wall, who suggested another alternative. David Nicol thought that
Larry was wrong.

  A new state of affairs
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00148.html

=head2 F<perl5db.pl>: read full lines from remote socket

Brendan O'Dea sent in a patch to help out the EPIC (Eclipse/Perl
Integration) crowd, who were trying to run the debugger over a
remote socket, and C<sysread> was giving them grief.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00232.html

=head2 The new POSIX tests

Jarkko Hietaniemi discovered that the POSIX tests were spewing a
lot of black smoke on the Tru64 platform, perhaps because Tru64
POSIXes you harder. He patched the test suite to make allowances
for this, and this was applied by H.Merijn Brand.

  POSIX is the new black
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00218.html

Yves Orton tweaked other POSIX tests to be skipped if the function
in question is not implemented on the host platform.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00230.html

=head2 Latest cut-and-paste findings for blead

Jarkko also reported on the current state of play of his collaboration
with the author of C<cpd> (Cut-and-Paste-Detector) to get it to work
with hairy C code, the sort which abounds in the perl codebase, due to
the combination of heavily-nested macros and machine-generated source.

Sadahiro Tomoyuki put forth a couple of suggestions based on the results
which Rafael applied.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00242.html

Yves Orton found it too painful to try and deal with this stuff by hand,
so he wrote a program in a popular text-manipulation language to do the
job in his place. The result was some truly mammoth macros.

Dr. Ruud suggested parenthesising macro arguments to diminish the chance
of precedence errors creeping in.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00264.html

=head2 C<\N{...}> in regular expression

Sadahiro Tomoyuki discovered that when C<use charnames ':full'> is
operative, C</a\N{PLUS SIGN}b/> will actually match "aaaaaab", but
not "a+b", which is possibly the wrong way around, and proposed a patch
to fix it. It turns out that that C<\cX> has similar problems, and
Sadahiro-san located the culprit.

  Nice obfu potential
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00267.html

=head1 New and old bugs from RT

=head2 Literal Whitespace in RegExps not properly parsed (#5051)

Noted as fixed in 5.8.6 and C<blead> by Yves Orton.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00206.html

=head2 C<.pmc> logic: keep, delete, deprecate? (#8860)

Steve Peters explained that the logic in question shall be neither
deleted nor deprecated.

  Here to stay
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00068.html

=head2 Segfault with complicated regex inside C<map> (#24898)

Steve also tried out a patch that Abigail offered to deal with a
problem of the regexp state stack being reallocated during C<pp_match>.
Unfortunately, C<blead> doesn't like it at all.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00070.html

=head2 panic: C<magic_killbackrefs> during global destruction. (#27630)

Steve thought that this was more likely due to the local patches
that Red Hat added to their perl build at the time, since he was
unable to produce it on more recent C<blead>s.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00067.html

=head2 Closing file seems to cause a seek operation (#29883)

Steve offered a work-around, by way of C<POSIX::_exit> to solve
this one.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00132.html

=head2 tests fail in 5.8.8 if C<$TMP> is not writable (#38947)

Steve added a check to bail out if the test being run was not
able to write to the directory in question. Adriano Ferreira
objected to the fact that no indication is given to the luckless
programmer who may be watching the test results scroll past
as to the reason why the test was skipped. Adriano thought a
bit more explanation would be in order.

  Absence of evidence
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00154.html

=head2 Do not recommend C<Switch.pm> in C<perlfaq> (#39170)

Steve agreed that we shouldn't mention that the next release of
Perl will have a switch statement, until we release the next
release.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00151.html

=head2 cygperl hangs on FIFO use (#39211)

Alexandr Ciornii indicated that this has been fixed in the latest
version of the Cygwin library (version 1.5.20).

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00238.html

=head2 C<stat()> doesn't work on dirhandles (#39261)

It does now, thanks to the efforts of Steve Peters. There is now
a need to hoist out common code from C<Perl_pp_stat> and C<Perl_my_stat>,
and some more tests would not go astray.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00076.html

=head2 C<*** glibc detected *** free(): invalid pointer> from C<Perl_mg_free> (#39528)

Christoph Maser solved this problem by installing a more recent version
of C<DBD::Mysql>.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00037.html

=head2 make test fails with C<getppid> in a Solaris 10 zone (#39536)

Steve Peters took the change from C<blead> to fix this issue and
backported it to C<maint>.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00064.html

=head2 nl_langinfo ==E<gt> Installation problems (#39625)

Dave Mitchell explained that this problem (an undefined symbol)
was more likely that the C run-time library or something else on
the system dealing with shared libraries was messed up, and that
it was unlikely that anything could be done from perlspace to
fix it.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00036.html

=head2 Segmentation faults with C<*@> (#39709)

David Serrano found a new way to do evil, by assigning to the C<*@>
typeglob. Apparently, since nobody had thought of doing this before,
it doesn't work as best it might.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00097.html

=head2 C<$AUTOLOAD> is never tainted (#39733)

Rick Delaney discovered this, and showed how a program could
misbehave without giving an error. He then followed up with a
patch to make it so. Hugo van der Sanden recommended that this
be flagged as a significant change to keep in mind when
upgrading.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00156.html

=head2 C<Exporter::Heavy> ignores custom C<$SIG{__WARN__}> handlers (#39739)

"evanspa" reported that C<Exporter::Heavy> pays no attention
to warn handlers. This is unfortunate, as FastCGI needs this
functionality, and so it was patched. Dave Mitchell commented
that in C<blead>, C<__WARN__> is no longer overridden (so the
problem no longer arises).

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00172.html

=head2 crash in C<unpack> (#39747)

Lukas Mai noticed a nasty problem with the C<Z> specifier and null
characters, but Yves Orton noted that it was already fixed in
C<blead>.

  Packed up
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00176.html

=head2 perl -d bug with 5.8.8 (#39758)

Shlomi Fish reported a problem with disappearing text in the
debugger.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00185.html

=head2 Perl5 Bug Summary

Gah! Back over the 1500 threshold.

  1501, to be precise
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00066.html

  All here
  http://rt.perl.org/rt3/NoAuth/perl5/Overview.html

=head1 New Core Modules

=over 4

=item *

C<Test::Builder/More/Simple> version 0.63 was released by Michael Schwern.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00268.html

=back

=head1 In Brief

Craig A. Berry wanted to know how to B<interpret some C<threads> 1.33>
results on VMS.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00120.html

Jerry D. Hedden asked Craig to take some code for a spin. This did
the trick, and so Craig applied it to C<blead>.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00123.html

Dave Mitchell pointed out a certain category of B<the last remaining
C<eval>s leaks>, when Fatal upgrades warnings to death, may prove
to be intractable in terms of leak proofability.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00117.html

Shlomi Fish began a B<wikipedia entry about Tom Christiansen> and asked
for contributions.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00193.html

Jarkko Hietaniemi provided a very B<useful addition to C<perlhack>>,
listing some tricks and traps for C programmers to remember.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00249.html

Gabor Szabo added B<some examples in the core documentation> to explain
some of the finer points of C<substr>. Rafael applied the patch. It remains
to be seen whether other functions lack similar, concise examples. Gabor
mentioned he may send some more in.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00261.html

Paul Johnson mentioned, in the B<Did you know this worked?> thread that
a variant of this trick is how he gets C<Devel::Cover> to weave its magic.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00347.html

=head2 About this summary

This summary was written by David Landgren.

Last week's thread:

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-07/msg00203.html

received a comment from Jan Dubois clarifying the status of
C<DBD::Oracle> on ActiveState. Executive summary: it's good
for 5.8 too. (And thus my evil plan for writing these
summaries is unmasked: it's all an elaborate plot to get
my own bugs and problems fixed -- and as bonus icing on the
cake, Philippe M. Chiasson reported that a new version had
been uploaded, which slices off about 50b of stuff that
isn't required).

If you want a bookmarklet approach to viewing bugs and change
reports, there are a couple of bookmarklets that you might find
useful on my page of Perl stuff:

  http://www.landgren.net/perl/

Weekly summaries are published on F<http://use.perl.org/> and posted
on a mailing list, (subscription: F<perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org>).
The archive is at F<http://dev.perl.org/perl5/list-summaries/>.
Corrections and comments are welcome.

If you found this summary useful, please consider contributing to
the Perl Foundation to help support the development of Perl.
