=head1 This Week on perl5-porters - 20-26 February 2006

C<Module::Build> achieves core status, VMS improvements,
and the usual bunch of bug fixes and enhancements.

=head1 Topics of Interest

=head2 Function prototyping and F<op/utftaint.t> failures in C<blead> in C<Win32>

Yves Orton first starting looking at smoke failures on Win32, and wondered
why he was seeing redefined subroutines in C<Getopt::Long>, but Nicholas
Clark stepped up and said that Yves had been caught out by a glitch that
had since been fixed in the source code.

Steve Hay and Nicholas worked through the failure, which was a
problem of taintedness when C<.> (dot) appears in the C<PATH>
environment variable. A fine example of how hard it is to get
cross-platform platform-dependent code correct.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-02/msg00939.html

=head2 C<Term::ReadLine>, C<CON:> and C<Term::ReadKey> on C<Win32> (cpan #17773)

Johnathon Stowe mentioned the issues he had uncovered with CPAN bug
reports filed against C<Term::ReadKey>. He had traced the problem
to C<Term::ReadLine> using the special device C<CON:> (as in
I<console>) on C<Win32>. One may open such a file directly, and things
will work correctly, but open the file and pass it as a handle to
C<Term::ReadLine> and things start to fall apart, which is in fact
what happens at the moment. Johnathon thought that the best approach
would be to fix C<Term::ReadLine>.

  Somebody else's bug
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-02/msg01018.html

=head2 DBD::Oracle 1.17 and 64-bit perl on AIX 5.1

John L. Allen was failing miserably at getting Oracle and 64-bit
perl on AIX to talk to each other, and asked for help. H.Merijn Brand
thought that the combination was "like voluntarily having someone
tie you down on a bed of nails, and then being whipped with a bunch
of rusty barbed wire." Dave Mitchell considered it highly
doubtful that one would be able to connect a 32-bit Oracle library
to a 64-bit perl.

After trying out different long integer and long double Perl
compilations, John succeeded in building a perl with 32-bit integers,
long doubles (128 bits) and Oracle all playing nicely.

Alan Olsen, speaking from experience, recommended that John go
either full 32-bit, or full 64-bit. Choosing the middle ground
just leads to pain and unhappiness.

  It can be done
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-03/msg00008.html

=head2 C<pow> failures on AIX with C<uselongdouble>

After having done battle with Oracle on AIX, John L. Allen turned his
attention to failures in the test suite, and noticed some misbehaviour
with the C<pow> function. Dominic Dunlop confirmed that something
strange was indeed occurring.

After a bit of detective work, John realised that the problem was
not with perl, but AIX's underlying math libraries. He wrote a small
C program to demonstrate the error, which should allow someone with
the necessary C<Configure>-fu to write the probe to work around the
breakage.

  The library and the damage done
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-03/msg00105.html

=head2 Detecting C<@ISA> cache invalidation

Caching in which package a method is found ensures decent run-time
performance.  That is, if an object calls a method unknown to the
current package, it consults C<@ISA> to look for other packages
that may have a suitable method. Once it succeeds in finding it the
first time, it caches the information so that subsequent method
calls can avoid paying the cost of the search. That works fine until
C<@ISA> is modified, in which case the cache has to be invalidated,
which in turn means that objects need to take a fresh look through
the C<@ISA> chain to locate their methods again.

Usually you don't have to care about this at all, it just works. But
some modules extremely tricky things, and can get thrown by changes
to C<@ISA>, and worse, up until now there was no easy way of
determining when it happens.

So Joshua ben Jore wrote C<B::sub_generation>, which provides a handy
technique for letting user code know when cache invalidation occurs.
When asked to explain what this all meant, Joshua provided a short
snippet of code, showing how things can get derailed if code
doesn't realise that C<@ISA> changed. Rafael thought that Joshua's
exposé should be saved somewhere in C<perlguts>.

  Talkin' about my B::sub_generation
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-03/msg00021.html

=head2 Small bug fixed in C<Module::Build> passthrough F<Makefile.PL>

Ken Williams made a change to C<Module::Build::Compat> to deal with the
fact that the method call C<< CPAN::Shell->install() >> doesn't appear to
return anything useful.

Yitzchak Scott-Thoennes wanted to know how one could reliably test to
see whether the install did in fact succeed. Andreas Koenig recommended
using the C<< $module->uptodate >> method as a suitable work-around.

Ken planned to use that approach soon.

  Look for a new version of Module::Build soon
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-03/msg00031.html

=head2 Tracking down leaks in C<XS> C<SV>s

Tracking down leaking scalars in C<XS> code is hard.

Andy Armstrong has started to work on C<Devel::LeakTrace>, which
uses a custom run loop, and was
having trouble determining the relationship between where C<SV>s
are created, and where perl reports that they were created.

Dave Mitchell pointed out that since 5.8.1 it has been possible
to compile a perl executable with C<-DDEBUG_LEAKING_SCALARS>,
which adds extra information to C<SV>s, which in turn can be
picked up by something like C<Devel::Peek>. On the other hand,
Andy's approach has the benefit of not requiring a specially
prepared perl.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-03/msg00066.html
  http://search.cpan.org/dist/Devel-LeakTrace/

=head2 Understanding C<ext> and testing

Adam Kennedy is working on the Vanilla Perl 5.8.8 distribution, and was
having trouble with some of the tests in the C<IO::> packages. He didn't
understand how the tests could succeed at all, and wondered how long they
had been failing.

Steve Hay had a look, and saw that the behaviour is dependent on whether
the C<fork> emulation code is used or not. And that some of the tests to
see whether C<fork> is defined or not are quite bizarre.

Nick Ing-Simmons came to the rescue, giving an explanation for
why some of the things are the way they are. All in all, it's an
area that Needs Work.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-03/msg00078.html

=head2 Making C<File::Find> Iterative

The venerable C<File::Find> module uses a callback scheme, something
beginners to Perl may find a bit unusual. Shlomi Fish looked at
extending it to provide an iterative interface similar to Shlomi's
own C<File::FTS> module.

Randal Schwartz pointed to an article he had written that dealt with
the same issue. Steve Peters noted that the main criterion for
judging patches to C<File::Find> is that they should incur no
speed penalty, thus, for a patch to be accepted, it would need
solid benchmarking.

Nick Ing-Simmons explained that the question of speed was one of
system calls. Make one unnecessary call, and the difference would
show up for people scanning deep and wide directory trees.

In the end, Shlomi decided to concentrate on C<File::Find::Object>,
as it appeared to be closer to suiting his needs. David Nicol
wondered whether C<File::Find> was thread-safe, and Tels made a
plug for his own C<File::Walker>

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-03/msg00047.html

  File::FTS
  http://search.cpan.org/dist/File-FTS/

  File::Walker
  http://search.cpan.org/dist/File-Walker/

=head2 Will someone please fix C<Devel::DProf>?

Jarkko Hietaniemi made a plea for someone with too much spare time on
their hands to please take a look at C<Devel::DProf> and fix some its
worst bugs. Andy Lester wanted some test cases.

Jarkko countered with:

  $ perl -d:DProf -e 'sub foo { next } for (1) { foo }'
  $ perl -d:DProf -e 'use autouse qw(Pod::Usage pod2usage); pod2usage'

Tels searched the RT queue:

  http://rt.perl.org/rt3/Ticket/Display.html?id=24058

  The bug stops here
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-03/msg00152.html

=head2 C<Module::Build> 0.27_08 added to the standard distribution

A first attempt was made to add C<Module::Build> to the core. This was
perhaps the largest thread of the week. It appears the graft has
succeeded, but more work is required.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-03/msg00167.html

=head2 The continuing saga of C<*a=$a=*b;${"a"}=*a;>

Nicholas returned to the C<*a=$a=*b;${"a"}=*a;>-perl-go-boom bug
and couldn't see a easy way out, short of cheating and getting
the optimiser to spot the sequence and thereby emit a different
op-tree to make the problem go away.

David Nicol wondered whether it was a case of worrying too much
about a construct that doesn't come up in practice. chromatic
thought that a tool simply should not crash on invalid input.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-03/msg00169.html

=head2 Some more VMS goodness

Peter Prymmer sent in a patch for some VMS-specific issues, which Craig
Berry applied partially. Peter was lacking a bit of context to understand
the reason why Craig did not apply the rest of it, and John E. Malmberg
summarised the issue nicely for the vmsperl readership who don't follow
p5p, and thus also saved the p5p summariser from having to do so:

  Peter's patch
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-03/msg00170.html

  John's summary
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-03/msg00186.html

=head2 Matching dynamic Unicode properties

Dan "Mr. Encode" Kogai related something he'd heard about non-existent
Unicode properties (like C<\p{IsBogus}>) in pattern matches. Sometimes
perl spits out an error... but not always. Yitzchak was quick to that
the results depended on whether the match had failed or not before the
scanner reached the location of C<\p> property in the target string.

Hugo van der Sanden wasn't even sure one could call it a bug (which
Dan did not say either), but thought that perhaps the C<utf8> module
could offer something to check for this situation, since, as
Sadahiro-san pointed out, it could be hard to check for user-defined
properties sufficiently early in the general case.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-03/msg00189.html

=head2 What Andy Lester did this week

  Removed a redundant o->op_type
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-02/msg01001.html
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-03/msg00000.html

  Non-null optimizations for SvREFCNT_inc
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-03/msg00032.html

  Initialising all of mgvtbl
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/maIling-lists/perl5-porters/2006-03/msg00033.html

=head1 Patches of Interest

=head2 C<PERL_TRACK_MEMPOOL> cripples environment after C<exit()>

Marcus Holland-Moritz uses C<blead> for his daily work, which leads
to some interesting discoveries. He had wanted to run C<gcov>
coverage analysis of one of his XS modules, and became distracted
by strange failures, probably best attributed to the
environment variable code clean out that took place a few months
ago. Evidently there are still demons lurking in that code. Marcus
supplied a patch to nail one of them, applied by Rafael Garcia-Suarez.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-02/msg00940.html

=head2 Silence useless errors in C<B::Lint> for C<grep>

Joshua ben Jore offered a patch to silent what he
perceived to be a useless warning emitted by C<B::Lint>,
concerning implicit matches with C<grep>. Since C<grep{ /pattern/ }>
is such a frequent idiom (and insofar as C<$_> is topicalised
(the New way of referring to what used to be known as C<local>ised)
within the C<grep> code block), it's a rather stupid warning.
Rafael agreed with Joshua and applied the patch, saying that
he'd be happy to accept similar patches for postfix C<for>
and C<map>.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-03/msg00002.html

=head2 Long pathnames on VMS and sundry fixes

John E. Malmberg sent in a patch for VMS builds and long pathname handling.
Abe Timmerman reported that results looked good.

  The patch
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-03/msg00122.html

  The smoke results
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-03/msg00127.html

=head1 Watching the smoke signals

Smoke [5.9.4] 27358 FAIL(F) hp-ux 11.11/64 (PA-2.0/64/2 cpu)

H.Merijn Brand poked around in C<test.pl> to try and cope with change #27345
and problems with tainting. He made the appropriate changes to get things
to work on HP-UX but wondered whether the patch would work on other
systems like C<VMS> or C<Win32>. Steve Hay found problems with the latter,
and proposed an alternative.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-03/msg00041.html

=head1 New and old bugs from RT

=head2 Lexical variables in regexp C<?{}> assertions (#38639)

Richard Clayton identified a problem with lexicals defined within a C<for>
and being set within a C<?{}> assertion of a pattern match. It gets set the
first time through the loop, but not on subsequent iterations. The work-around
is to declare the lexical in a scope further out from the C<for> block.
No takers.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-02/msg00941.html

=head2 C<Configure -des> stops waiting for C<< <CR> >> (#38642)

Anton Koinov ran into problems configuring perl on Gentoo. Andy
Dougherty was intrigued, and tried to guess what was going wrong, and
suggested Anton run the following command

  sh -x ./Configure -S 2>&1 | tee Configure.out

... in order to capture all of the text generated during the run (as
C<-des> discards certain output deemed to be mostly harmless). No news
back from Anton as of yet.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-02/msg00944.html

=head2 MULTICALL causes segfaults with very large return stacks (#38644)

Tassilo von Parseval has been working with the new C<MULTICALL> interface
and noticed problems when the return stack is very large. This
shows up as segfaults in XS code, such as C<List::Util>.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-02/msg00958.html

=head2 Long file names on Stratus VOS (#38645 and #38646)

Paul Green uses Perl on Stratus VOS, whose file system limits file
names to no more than 32 characters. This poses a problem when he
tries to run the test suite of a module like C<Pod::Simple>, which
contains a test name F<search_25_glob_squaa_coloncolon_kleene.t>.
At 40 characters long, that's more than Stratus can bear.

Similarly, there's another file, F<_white_with_navy_blue_on_black.css>
that is also a bit too long. Nicholas Clark wondered whether
32 was some sort of POSIX minimum, and recalled that some tests
had already been renamed to deal with characters in file names that
VMS had trouble processing. Joshua Juran noted that traditional
Mac-based platforms (C<MacOS> and C<Lamp>) are limited to 31
characters. (MacOS X does not have this limitation).

(The Summariser wishes to point out the existence of
Sébastien Aperghis-Tramoni's C<Test::Portablility::Files>
to module authors).
  
  One file
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-02/msg01003.html

  And then another
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-02/msg01004.html

  No more excuses
  http://search.cpan.org/dist/Test-Portability-Files/

=head2 64-bit (non-)builds on Solaris 8 (#38664)

James Overly had problems building a 64-bit perl on Solaris 8.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-03/msg00058.html

=head2 Debugger Loses Names for Anonymous Subroutines (#38673)

chromatic showed how the trick of assigning to the C<__ANON__>
typeglob to name an anonymous subroutine doesn't work in the
debugger.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-03/msg00147.html

=head2 C<O::Deparse> not working as expected (#38684)

"harleypig" was having trouble with C<split>. I tried to pay attention,
but Stephen McCamant supplied a patch to fix the behaviour (which was
apparently broken), which was applied by Rafael. The end.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-03/msg00202.html

=head2 Perl5 Bug Summary

  1548 open items
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-03/msg00193.html

  in all their glory
  http://rt.perl.org/rt3/NoAuth/perl5/Overview.html

=head1 New Core Modules

=over 8

=item *

C<CPAN> version 1.87 uploaded by Andreas Koenig.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-02/msg00949.html

=item *

C<Archive::Tar> version 1.29 uploaded by Jos I. Boumans.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-03/msg00074.html

=back

=head1 In Brief

Seung-Ho Han wanted to know how B<make sense of what C<B::Xref::compile>
produces>. Joshua ben Jore explained what was going on, and that more
clues can be found by studying F<O.pm>.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-02/msg00952.html

Jerry Hedden started to B<extract F<threads.pm> from the core> in order to
make it available on CPAN. This would permit enhancements to be made to
the threads implementation faster than the current C<blead> to C<maint>
to C<release> cycle.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-02/msg01013.html

Jim Cromie continued to refine his self-described hare-brained
B<C<op-next>/C<op-sibling>optimisation scheme>, defending it against
the critics, but ran into trouble somewhere deep down in the guts.
In doing so, he came up with a new presentation scheme for
C<B::Concise>.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-03/msg00001.html

Anton Berezin caught and B<eliminated an extraneous C<#endif>> in
F<fakesdio.h>.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-03/msg00010.html

Jarkko Hietaniemi discovered that B<C<-d:Foo=bar> no longer works>
in the current Perl release (bug report #38657). Rafael traced the
problem down to the fact that C<\0> (NUL) was no longer allowed in
environment variables, and fixed things up as change #27359. Jarkko
also supplied another patch for the same thing, which Rafael also
applied.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-03/msg00025.html
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-03/msg00052.html

Getting back to last week's thread on B<unwanted auto-vivification with
C<foreach>>, David Nicol showed a snippet of code that offers a way of
working around the problem, and wondered whether the documentation
should record it somewhere. Graham Barr noted that using C<reverse>
also suppresses the auto-vivification behaviour. And that if you didn't
want a slice reversed, you needed to C<reverse reverse>.

  There's at least one way to do it
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-03/msg00044.html

Jarkko added a test to C<Data::Dumper>'s test suite to ensure that B<the bug
#38612 that was fixed in 5.8.7 never returns>.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-03/msg00049.html

H.Merijn added C<Configure> support for the GCC B<compiler options
C<__builtin_expect> and C<__builtin_choose_expr>>.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-03/msg00063.html

Paul Marquess delivered B<a patch for C<Compress::Zlib>>, following on from
his recent work to add compression plugins.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-03/msg00064.html

Joshua start to have a look at B<the new smart match operator C<~~>> and
found a discrepancy between its behaviour and that of Pugs/Perl6.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-03/msg00081.html

Abe Timmerman patched B<F<Porting/checkcfgvar.pl> to pick up
F<configure.com>> and plunged unwittingly into the wonderful
and frightening world of VMS symbols. John E. Malmberg and
Craig A. Berry were sent in to rescue him.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-03/msg00090.html

Abe then thought it would be a good idea to see what happens
when one builds a threaded perl on VMS. In the process he uncovered
a couple of problems that John and Craig sorted out.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-03/msg00139.html

Dave Rolsky wanted to know B<if nested closures still leak memory>. Dave
Mitchell thought that no closure leakage bugs remained in C<blead>, but
pointed out that not all of the new code had made it back into C<maint>.

  Until proven otherwise
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-03/msg00103.html

Randy W. Sims want to B<install an older perl> on his Ubuntu linux
distribution, but the install began to create an infinitely deep
directory tree.

  On and on and on
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-03/msg00148.html

Linda W gave a report on B<the effects of configuration options> on
the resulting perl binary.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-03/msg00161.html

Perl can no longer be compiled with B<a K&R compiler>.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-03/msg00160.html

David Nicol posted his thought on what he would like to see in the
way of B<plug-in optimisers>. A optimistic optimiser could optimise
a section of code, and then, if some assumption failed to hold true,
it could de-optimise the code back to the initial state. I think
some proof-of-concept code will be required.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-03/msg00174.html

=head2 About this summary

This summary was written by David Landgren.

Information concerning bugs referenced in this summary (as #nnnnn)
may be viewed at http://rt.perl.org/rt3/Ticket/Display.html?id=nnnnn

Information concerning patches to C<maint> or C<blead> referenced in
this summary (as #nnnnn) may be viewed at
http://public.activestate.com/cgi-bin/perlbrowse?patch=nnnnn

If you want a bookmarklet approach to viewing bugs and change reports,
there are a couple of bookmarklets that you might find useful on
my page of Perl stuff:

  http://www.landgren.net/perl/

Weekly summaries are published on F<http://use.perl.org/> and posted
on a mailing list, (subscription: F<perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org>).
The archive is at F<http://dev.perl.org/perl5/list-summaries/>.
Corrections and comments are welcome.

If you found this summary useful or enjoyable, please consider
contributing to the Perl Foundation to help support the development
of Perl.
