=head1 This Week on perl5-porters - 13-19 March 2006

On the move -- C<Module::Build> moving into core -- Perl
core moving around the file system -- Threads moving onto
CPAN -- plus the usual assortment of bug reports, patches
and new ideas.

=head1 Topics of Interest

=head2 Support for relocating C<@INC>

Nicholas Clark delivered the functionality to make C<@INC> relocatable.
This means you can now build Perl, install some modules from CPAN,
take the whole directory tree and move it elsewhere and things
continue to work. Andy Dougherty wondered how Nicholas had dealt
with the shared F<libperl.so> file.

The answer is that there isn't much that can be done in the general
case, although some platforms, like Solaris, make the issues easier
to deal with. In other words, Nicholas has done about as much as
can be done. Now for testing and feedback.

  A movable feast
  http://xrl.us/ki3w

=head2 Overridable filetest operators (continued)

Salvador Fandio continued to look at the problem of overriding
C<stat>, which was now a question of how to deal with the C<;$>
prototype correctly. Rafael didn't want anything to be changed at
this late stage of the game, and instead suggested two new prototypes,
C<^$> and C<^*>.

In this scenario, C<stat> would have the latter prototype. (The
C<^> is loosely based on a concept from the Perl TODO list, which
is to allow prototypes to indicate that the routine defaults to
using C<$_> if no argument is passed).

  Prototyping the prototype
  http://xrl.us/ki3x

=head2 C<Module::Compile> and the C<.pmc> file extension

Audrey Tang wrote to explain her position on what C<.pmc> means.
Surprisingly, this elicited no discussion.

  Nothing to do with Parrot (yet)
  http://xrl.us/ki3y

=head2 Advice for C<pack> failure needed

H.Merijn Brand was trying to understand why C<gcc> 4.0.3 works, but
4.1.x doesn't when producing a 64-bit perl for HP-UX 11.00 and
11.11.  He had stripped a failing test file (F<pack.t>) down to a
bare minimum.

He had gone as far as literally unrolling the code from F<pp_pack.c>
into straight C using C<int>s and C<double>s instead of C<I32>s,
C<NV>s and C<SV>s, but was well and truly stuck (since this resulting
code worked identically on both compilers).

  What we have here is a failure to pack
  http://xrl.us/ki3z

=head2 Move C<DynaLoader> into F<libperl.so>

Gisle Aas has problems with applications that wish to instantiate
an embedded perl interpreter. This is due to the fact that C<Dynaloader>
is compiled statically into the perl stub executable. He wanted to
move things around a bit so that part of C<DynaLoader> is, well,
loaded dynamically.

So far, no complaints.

  Pulling yourself up by the bootstraps
  http://xrl.us/ki32

=head2 C<Useless localization of substr> warning messages

Hugo van der Sanden was puzzled by new C<useless localization of substr>
that C<blead> was now issuing, and wondered what to do about it. Again,
no takers.

  What's the use?
  http://xrl.us/ki33

=head1 Patches of Interest

=head2 C<Term::ReadKey>/C<Term::ReadLine> on Windows

Johnathon Stowe produced a patch to fix up the
C<Term::ReadKey>/C<Term::ReadLine> bug on the C<Win32> platform.

  http://xrl.us/ki34

=head2 VMS-specific C<arg_defines> for C<ExtUtils::CBuilder>

Craig A. Berry sent in a patch for C<ExtUtils::CBuilder> to deal
with the requirements of compiling extensions in C on VMS. Ken
Williams, the maintainer, took the patch under his wing and asked
if there was a test case that could expose this problem, should it
ever arise in the future.

John E. Malmberg tweaked Craig's patch to work around a couple of other
issues he encountered. In fact John sent in a steady stream of patches
for VMS this week. See the In Brief section to catch them all.

  http://xrl.us/ki35

=head2 A bit more C<Module::Build> help for VMS

Craig then added a patch to help get more of C<Module::Build>'s test
suite to pass. John received some strange errors that left him puzzled.

  http://xrl.us/ki36

=head2 SPAGAIN in the poor-man's-multicall API

Robin Houston fixed up F<multicall.h> (in C<List::Util>) to deal
with the problem that Tassilo von Parseval had encountered in bug
#38644 (a missing C<SPAGAIN> macro call). Rafael applied the patch
to C<blead> as change #27486, noting that Graham Barr will have to
apply the change to his own repository of C<List::Util> as well.

  http://xrl.us/ki37

=head2 Sundry fixes from Jan Dubois for C<Win32>

Jan Dubois realised that some of the work he did to make C<alarm> work
on Windows 2003 could cause perl go into an infinite loop. He sent in
a patch to restore the correct behaviour, and in the process of
investigating found another small problem that also needed fixing.

  win32_async_check() fixed
  http://xrl.us/ki38

  win32_plclose() fixed
  http://xrl.us/ki39

=head2 Allocating op-codes from arenas

Jim Cromie landed a first version of patch that would allow op-codes to
be allocated from arenas (following on from the discussion last week with
Nicholas Clark). There were, nonetheless, a number of issues that will
have to be worked through. For instance, it has a nasty tendency to
segfault. People were still digesting the patch at summary time.

  http://xrl.us/ki4a

=head2 The continuing story of Andy Lester's quest to C<const>

=over 4

=item *

Made C<S_looks_like_bool>'s argument C<const>...

  http://xrl.us/ki4b

=item *

Taught some of the new MAD code preprocessor tricks to
keep C<gcc> quiet.

  http://xrl.us/ki4c

=item *

Redundant boolean checks removed, some C<goto>'s for speed and sundry
C<const>s in F<regexec.c>. Dave Mitchell surfaced briefly to mention that
he's in the middle of reworking C<S_regmatch> (I<and the crowd goes wild>)
and asked for this patch to be kept on ice.

Hugo noticed that Andy's work highlighted the underlying similarities
in three sections of the code, and that all should be hoisted out into
a subordinate function or macro.

  http://xrl.us/ki4d

=item *

Changed the semantics of C<S_isa_lookup>. Andy noticed that this function
(in C<universal.c>) returned pointers to C<PL_sv_yes> and C<PL_sv_no>
simply to indicate truth. So he changed it to return C<TRUE> or C<FALSE>.

  http://xrl.us/ki4e

=item *

Cleanups in F<op.c>

  http://xrl.us/ki4f

=item *

Random consting in C<Data::Dumper>.

  Not random, merely chaotic
  http://xrl.us/ki4g

=item *

And changed some C<@ISA> definitions to work correctly under C<use strict>,
such as C<@ISA = (Exporter)> becoming C<@ISA = qw(Exporter)>.

  http://xrl.us/ki4h

=back

=head1 New and old bugs from RT

=head2 overload and rebless (#34925)

Nicholas Clark returned to a bug from last year (which I cannot
find again on Xray) dealing with reC<bless>ing an object in an
overloaded class, and proposed three ways of fixing it, One of them
was probably only suitable for C<blead>, and thus 5.10, but two
other avenues showed more promise. This is apparently a big issue
for C<Class::DBI>.

Nicholas then wrote a patch to implement one of the safer approaches,
and if the time it takes to run the test suite is any guide, the
performance difference is pretty much lost in the noise.

  http://xrl.us/ki4i

  The original Perlbug (authentication required)
  http://rt.perl.org/rt3/Ticket/Display.html?id=34925

=head2 Debugger Loses Names for Anonymous Subroutines (#38673 update)

chromatic returned to his own bug report, and discovered that by deleting
a swath of code in F<op.c> he was able to make it work to his satisfaction,
even though he felt slightly uneasy about doing do.

Rafael Garcia-Suarez didn't think much of the idea either and explained
a better way of fixing it. He thought it should be feasible to patch the
debugger only, the only trouble is that patching the debugger is even
more scary.

Another important issue for Rafael is the poor state of C<$^P> (a.k.a
C<$PERLDB>) in the C<perlvar> documentation. Someone needs to explain
I<why> you would want to diddle the bits, and what happens when you do.

Nicholas Clark admitted to having seen weird thing occurring deep down
in the depths of C<CV>s, C<GV>s and stashes, but had never been able to
adequately explain why.

  Shades of Moria
  http://xrl.us/ki4j

=head2 C<SvPOK> breaks magic in 5.8.5 and beyond (#38707)

Zowie noted that C<SvPOK> breaks code in C<PDL>, specifically, when
looking at things like C<$#$arrayref>.

  http://xrl.us/ki4k

=head2 perl 5.8.8 make fails at dynaloader (#38687)

Dominic Dunlop reproduced the symptoms demonstrated by Andy Ford in
the initial bug report by C<touch(1)>ing the F<Makefile> so that an
empty file was created. He suggested that Andy delete the directory,
make sure there was sufficient free disk space, and start the build
again.

  If problems persist, consult your doctor in the morning
  http://xrl.us/ki4m

=head2 C<local>ised stash slices are fixed (#38710)

To recap:

  local $::{"func"} = sub { "func" };

worked, but 

  local @::{qw/ func1 func2 /} = (sub { "func1" }, sub { "func2" });

... did not. Now it does, thanks to a patch for F<pp.c> from
Rick Delaney.

  http://xrl.us/ki4n

=head2 C<Perl_utf8n_to_uvuni> decodes illegal characters (#38722)

John Gardiner Myers uncovered a discrepancy between what
C<Perl_utf8n_to_uvuni> decodes (that is to say, Unicode characters)
and what C<Perl_uvuni_to_utf8_flags> considers illegal, and provides
a short snippet of code to demonstrate the problem. No takers as yet.

  http://xrl.us/ki4o

=head2 Backticks don't work in Win32 multi-threaded perl (#38723)

Krzysztof Koczyjan filed a bug that showed how C<fork> and
backticks don't work on the Win32 platform. He traced the
problem to the routine C<win32_popen>, which is apparently
not thread-safe. He then recompiled perl with C<-DUSE_RTL_POPEN>
and saw that that fixes the problem.

  http://xrl.us/ki4p

=head2 C<syslog-ng> inappropriately expects C<\n> (and C<\0>?) in C<syslog> messages  (#28019)

Julian Mehnle was chasing down a bug in Debian-land concerning their
C<libmail-spf-query-perl> package, and stumbled over the changes made
to C<Sys::Syslog> after the C<Webmin> flap. The issue was that the module
no longer appended a C<\n> to the logged message, and C<syslog-ng> was
running lines together.

Sébastien Aperghis-Tramoni, the maintainer of
C<Sys::Syslog>. explained that the current state of affairs was more
due to work-arounds for broken commercial Unix C<syslog> implementations,
and that the RFCs surrounding these are sadly only informational, and
do not mandate a specific way of doing things.

  http://xrl.us/ki4q

=head2 Poor example for C<$^V> in C<perlvar> (#38743)

Nicholas Clark thought that the documentation example in C<perlvar>
concerning C<$^V> (perl version) was rather stupid, and hoped someone
could come up with a better idea. Dave Mitchell came up with a very
clever example that dealt with the hash key randomisation work that
went into perl 5.8.1.

  Clues you can use
  http://xrl.us/ki4r

=head2 Undetectable, incompatible API changes in C<POPpx>, etc. (#38744)

John Gardiner Myers sent in a scathing bug report concerning changes
to the C<POPpx> macro, which broke his code when running on  5.8.8.

Nicholas Clark replied that no-one who watched the commit go past
realised the subtle change in behaviour, nor did anyone pick it up
in any of the maintenance snapshots in the three months that
followed the change. Similarly, the bug was not caught by anyone
who built the release candidate running up to the official 5.8.8
release.

  The importance of testing
  http://xrl.us/ki4s

=head2 Segmentation fault in generating F<Config.pm> (#38745)

Derek Chen was having trouble building perl on an embedded Linux
system running on an ARM processor. Dominic Dunlop wondered
whether this could be related to bug #38913, and wanted to know
whether previous versions of perl had been built successfully on
the platform, or if this was the first time. The next thing to
try is to build an unoptimised C<miniperl>.

  http://xrl.us/ki4t

  Follow-ups in a detached thread
  http://xrl.us/ki4u

=head2 F<threads.xs> broken under C<PERL_IMPLICIT_SYS>; 5.8.8 regression

Jan Dubois sent a patch (for the third time) to free the
perl interpreter structure after the threads structure. The latest
changes to F<threads.xs> broke this again.

Tels asked for better documentation in the code, and new tests in 
test suite to ensure that the problem doesn't come back a fourth time.

Jerry Hedden picked up the patch and reworked it slightly. His plan
is to get some feedback from CPAN testers before getting it folded
back into C<blead>.

  http://xrl.us/ki4v

=head2 C<qx> loses C</dev/tty> (#38748)

"ende" had a C<Tcl> script hooked up to a perl program running as
a daemon which wasn't working. But the equivalent daemon written
in shell worked correctly. Dominic Dunlop thought that there might
be problems with the program if it really I<was> a daemon, because
in that case it would have no controlling terminal and thus no
C</dev/tty>.

  http://xrl.us/ki4w

=head2 Perl5 Bug Summary

  1556 tickets
  http://xrl.us/ki4x

  Summarised here
  http://rt.perl.org/rt3/NoAuth/perl5/Overview.html

=head1 New Core Modules

=over 4

=item *

C<ExtUtils::CBuilder> version 0.17 uploaded Ken Williams (based on the
thread concerning VMS. See above).

  http://xrl.us/ki4y

=item *

C<Module::Build> version 0.27_09, also from Ken.

  http://xrl.us/ki4z

=item *

C<threads> version 1.09 uploaded by Jerry D. Hedden.

  http://xrl.us/ki42

He also sent in a patch to sync C<blead> with the current
versions of C<threads> and C<threads::shared>.

  threads 1.12
  http://xrl.us/ki43

  threads::shared 0.99
  http://xrl.us/ki44

=back

=head1 In Brief

John E. Malmberg reported at the beginning of the week that B<13 test
scripts (of 1140 total) were still generating failures> on VMS.

  threads and VMS (redux)
  http://xrl.us/ki45

He tweaked F<thread.h> to give B<threads on VMS a bit more stack space>.

  http://xrl.us/ki46

And some B<buffer size fixes for F<vms.c>>

  http://xrl.us/ki47

And B<C<utime>> (I think I need a what "What John did" section).

  http://xrl.us/ki48

Peter Prymmer filed a small patch to B<fix C<Pod::Simple> on C<blead>> so that
it works on VMS ODS-2. (Which I understand to be an older file-system
for VMS, the current being ODS-5).

  http://xrl.us/ki49

Paul Marquess sent in a patch to synch C<blead> with the CPAN versions
of B<C<Compress::Raw::Zlib>, C<Compress::Zlib> and C<IO::Compress::Zlib>>.

  http://xrl.us/ki5a

Someone noted (in bug #34981) that B<binding C<STDIN> to C<scalar>
hides fd 0 forever>. I'm not quite sure what they mean by that.

  http://xrl.us/ki5b

Randy W. Sims nailed an B<uninitialised value in C<Archive::Tar>>.

  http://xrl.us/ki5c

=head2 About this summary

There was some feedback from Marcus Holland-Moritz on last
week's summary concerning the issue of C<DEBUG_LEAKING_SCALARS>.

  http://xrl.us/ki5d

This summary was written by David Landgren.

Information concerning bugs referenced in this summary (as #nnnnn)
may be viewed at http://rt.perl.org/rt3/Ticket/Display.html?id=nnnnn

Information concerning patches to C<maint> or C<blead> referenced in
this summary (as #nnnnn) may be viewed at
http://public.activestate.com/cgi-bin/perlbrowse?patch=nnnnn

If you want a bookmarklet approach to viewing bugs and change reports,
there are a couple of bookmarklets that you might find useful on
my page of Perl stuff:

  http://www.landgren.net/perl/

Weekly summaries are published on F<http://use.perl.org/> and posted
on a mailing list, (subscription: F<perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org>).
The archive is at F<http://dev.perl.org/perl5/list-summaries/>.
Corrections and comments are welcome.

If you found this summary useful or enjoyable, please consider
contributing to the Perl Foundation to help support the development
of Perl.
