=head1 This Week on perl5-porters - 27 November-3 December 2006

I<"So I don't really have an answer for you. When faced with a similar
situation, I punted and did a PerlIO_fdopen(fileno(stdio)) instead of
a PerlIO_importFILE(stdio).  This way you know you are creating a
unixio layer which gets ref counted properly."> -- Craig A. Berry,
somewhere in the sprawling PerlIO layers saga.

=head1 Topics of Interest

=head2 C<PerlIO::Scalar> buffering

H.Merijn Brand wondered if he had uncovered a problem with performing
IO to a scalar, since at the end of a series of operations where the
scalar should have been emptied, a lone newline character remained.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-11/msg00995.html

=head2 Whither 5.8.9

Jerry D. Hedden wondered if there was going to be a 5.8.9 release, and if
so would arrive before 5.10.0. H.Merijn Brand confirmed that a 5.8.9 release
is going to happen some time, and it's likely to escape from the lab before
5.10. No dates have been set for either event as yet.

  when it's ready
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-11/msg01004.html

=head2 Old C<dmake>s for building perl on Win32...

Steve Hay noticed that recent changes to the Makefiles for Windows are
no longer understood by the older make programs floating around in the
Windows world. He felt that the best approach was to update the README
to explain the fix, in the unlikely event that someone encounters it,
and to move on.

  time to go
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-11/msg01010.html

=head2 ... and archaic Visual C++ compilers

Steve also noted that the compiler writers at Microsoft have played the
compiler command line switch fandango in recent versions, and now
warnings are emitted when certain deprecated switches are used.  To
get things into shape means drawing the line at VC++ 5.0.  This
equates to roughly a 10 year old compiler. The Makefile states that
things should be compatible all the way back to 2.0, but Steve has
his doubts.

Nicholas Clark pointed out that if people really need to use a pre-5.0
compiler, all they have to do is change the new-name switch back to
old-name, and things should work. Steve updated F<README.win32> to note
this point.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-11/msg01022.html

=head2 Trouble with PERLIO_INIT/PERLIO_TERM changes

Steve Hay and Jarkko Hietaniemi tried to make sense of the ongoing
PerlIO problems, in that reference counts were going too far negative
and bad things were happening as a result. And the code was a bit
too twisty for people to understand exactly what was happening. My
eyes sort of glazed over on this thread.

It eventually wound up being filed as a bug, see below.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-11/msg01062.html

Also, in another thread, Steve also wondered whether
B<PerlIO_importFILE()> needed to do a C<refcnt_inc>. Craig A. Berry
showed him how to test the hypothesis. One thing that came out of
it is that Steve noticed that the code was leaking file descriptors.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-12/msg00026.html

Similarly, Yves Orton found a segfault on Windows due
to one of the many changes that were attempted this week
to come to grips with these issues. Rafaël was pretty
sure about which patch was the problem, and when Yves reverted it,
his build succeeded in starting the test suite.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-12/msg00042.html

=head2 C<PathTools> now at svk.perl.org

Ken Williams announced that he'd thrown up C<File::Spec> and C<Cwd>,
on a Subversion repository, and asked if there were any volunteers
who wanted to poke around at them. Philippe Bruhat bravely stepped
forward.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-11/msg01081.html

=head2 Change #26513 breaks C<Devel::SmallProf>

Nicholas Clark found that the addition of an assertion to ensure
an AV is always non-null made C<Devel::SmallProf> curl up and die,
and didn't what to do about it.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-11/msg01101.html

In the new month, the thread continued: Gisle Aas observed that
the problem went away of the build was configured with C<usethreads>.
Rafaël Garcia-Suarez realised that the heart of the problem lay
in F<toke.c>, and made the appropriate change there.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-12/msg00009.html

=head2 Minor patch for C<Benchmark.pm>

Christophe Grosjean patched what he thought was a minor problem
in C<Benchmark>, but was really quite a significant bug when you
think about it: C<cmpthese> used to ignore child process times,
which led to the fascinating outcome that a process that spawned
an external command appeared to be faster than something done in
native Perl.

  Highly illogical
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-12/msg00065.html

=head1 Patches of Interest

=head2 Abstract mempool header testing

Jarkko did a bit of work on memory pools, (that approximates the
conditions of Win32 on Unix), where memory allocation (especially
in threads) is a much trickier issue. Nicholas Clark gave a clear
explanation of how the mechanisms present in the source code fitted
together, and Jan Dubois completed the picture.

Based especially upon Jan's information, Jarkko produced a patch to
attempt to clear up some PerlIO problems. Jan, however, thought
that the code in question traded one set of problems (the mempool
allocations) for another (leaking stuff from the opcode tree instead),
and explained how to fix that problem

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-11/msg00991.html

As the month rolled over into December, Yves Orton took a stab at
the matter, pointing to a couple of spots in the code that he felt
relied on flawed assumptions.  The patches went back and forth, and
I lost track of which patch undid what, and which ones were reverted.

Jan Dubois suggested one strategy for getting things straightened
out, and Jarkko coded it up as a patch. This seemed to fix things
sufficiently well that Steve Hay was able to unrevert a previously
reverted patch with everything still behaving itself.

Yves was most impressed, but also confused, and asked if there was some
documentation that explained The Big Picture. Steve Hay did his best to
illuminate the part of the canvas that he understood, hoping that Jan
Dubois would chip in and complete as necessary. And so he did. Jan gave
a thorough best exposé on the issue of mempools here:

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-12/msg00128.html

Now all we need is for someone to draw a diagram of the myriad ways
in which one may allocate memory in perl. The thread in the December,
from the top:

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-12/msg00056.html

=head2 Building 5.8.8 on OS/2

Ilya Zakharevich delivered a patch to get 5.8.8 compiling again on
OS/2. There are still some tests that fail, and Ilya promised to
address them in a future patch.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-11/msg01013.html

=head2 C<perl5db> on C<miniperl>

Similarly, Ilya noticed that F<perl5db.pl> no longer worked with
C<miniperl>, due to a reliance on C<IO::Handle>, which was not yet
fully operational at that stage of the build process. So he tweaked
things to handle this situation gracefully.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-11/msg01014.html

=head2 C<Test::Class> and blead

A test in C<Test::Class> tested for a bogus regular expression, and
was supposed to die. The funny part was that thanks to Yves Orton's
tireless efforts, what used to be a meaningless string of characters
is now a legal pattern, so the pattern matches and the test fails.

So Nicholas Clark made the pattern even more bogus, to force the
pattern to fail again. Which judging by Yves's prodigious output,
should see the test safe for a least three weeks.

  NO CARRIER
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-11/msg01047.html

=head2 MacOSX debugger fork support

F<perldb.pl> received some more patching goodness from Bo Lindbergh
to allow the debugger to be fired up in a separate terminal window
on Mac OS/X.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-11/msg01048.html

=head2 Make C<B::Lint> use C<Module::Pluggable>

Joshua ben Jore was one of the first people to take advantage of
C<Module::Pluggable>'s new promotion to core, and rewrote C<B::Lint>
to make use of it. He was immensely pleased, since it meant that he
was able to rip out the previous clumsy efforts.

  The street finds its own uses for things
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-11/msg01073.html

=head2 No code specified for -.

Jarkko discovered that an 'e' was dropped in the message C<No code
specified for -e> if in fact there was no code.

  dash before e except after p
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-11/msg01077.html

=head2 Perl regexp structures bifurcation

Yves Orton continued to deliver a stream of changes to introduce a
higher level of abstraction to the regular expression engine. This
is part of his ongoing work to permit pluggable engines.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-11/msg01098.html

=head2 C<\R> means something else in POSIX

Yves discovered that not only does the Unicode consortium care about
regular expressions, they even published a specification on the
matter. Yves read the spec, and learnt that they recommend using
C<\R> as a best-practice sequence for specifying a generic line-break
marker.

This unfortunately clashes with C<\R> as a relative back-reference
assertion in Perl's regular expression, but since we are still not
out of beta, Yves was quite happy to cast around for a different
unused character. After looking around at what was left of the
alphabet, he settled in C<\g> (as in group). He implemented a
generalised syntax with curly braces, so that now C<\g1> or C<\g{1}>
is the same as the existing C<\1>, and conversely, that C<\g-1> and
C<\g{-1}> as a replacement for the now-defunct C<\R1> syntax. (Yves,
if you're reading this, doesn't that mean you could drop
C<\kE<lt>fooE<gt>> and subsume it into C<\gE<lt>fooE<gt>>? You have
15 minutes to write the patch).


Yves also thought that implement C<\R> shouldn't be too difficult either,
noting in passing that Philip Hazel will be delivering it in the next
release of PCRE.

  14 minutes and counting
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-12/msg00067.html

=head1 New and old bugs from RT

=head2 Segfault due to a semicolon inside an array reference (#40995)

Shlomi Fish discovered that a semi-colon, such as in C<[ $i-E<gt>func2();
]> gets the tokeniser in a tizz. Rafaël noted that this
misbehaviour was fixed in blead.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-11/msg00996.html

=head2 Setting C<$0> invalidates environment shown by C<ps> (#41008)

Alexander Bluhm noted that assigning to C<$0> causes unwanted side-effects
on OpenBSD, and suggested a patch to fix things up. Rafaël took it and
applied it to C<blead>.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-11/msg01028.html

=head2 C<(?(COND))> in pattern matching not working properly (#41010)

Karl Williamson discovered a bug where an alternation (C<(a|b)>)
did not match the same thing as a character class (C<[ab]>). What
was worse was that the original program, when it didn't crash, the
values of other assorted variables in the program mysteriously
changed. Yves Orton figured out what the problem was, and developed
a patch to fix things up.

  Applied
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-11/msg01038.html

=head2 "backslash-G" does not appear to work in a while loop (#41011)

Jim Woodworth filed what he thought was a bug, but Dr. Ruud suspected
that he was a victim of crypto-context.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-11/msg01039.html

=head2 Changing C<$0> on darwin leads to excessive padding in C<ps> (#38868)

The week continued in a C<$0> vein, with Darwin also causing trouble. Chris
Dolan sorted things out with the help of the C preprocessor.

  You were expecting \0?
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-12/msg00038.html

=head2 Regexp optimizer loses its hopes too soon (#39096)

Yves Orton explored the reasons why the optimiser was ignoring
obvious shortcuts and pointed out why a naive solution wouldn't
work, and the problems that a generalised solution would have to
consider.

  It used to be simple
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-12/msg00062.html

=head2 C<LD_LIBRARY_PATH> changes not exported to Dynaloader,Perl 5.8.8 On Solaris 8 (#40655)

A mysterious person reported that this bug was resolved.

  Private and Confidential
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-12/msg00064.html

=head2 SIGSEGV with C<pos()> in regexp (#40989)

Yves Orton noted that this bug no longer existed in C<blead>. This is no doubt
a pleasing side-effect of all the work that the engine has received in recent
times, although he was hard pressed to say which change would have been
responsible. By extension, he didn't expect the fix to be backported to
C<maint>.

  One more reason
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-12/msg00015.html

Yves noted that bug #39893 was probably another facet of the same problem.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-12/msg00019.html

=head2 C<File::Glob> braces with character classes erratic behaviour (#41027)

Kolano discovered some inconsistencies with globs, curly braces and
character classes.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-12/msg00039.html

=head2 Nested closures result in scoping related segmentation fault (#41028)

... and they are fixed in blead.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-12/msg00040.html

=head2 C<PerlIOUnix_refcnt_dec()> croaks in bleadperl since #29065 (#41030)

Steve Hay reported that since change #29065, his C<Win32-SharedFileOpen>
croaked with a strange error from somewhere within PerlIO. He traced the
problem to a couple of patches, thinking that while they were not incorrect,
perhaps there was an underlying bug which had only now been exposed as a result.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-12/msg00053.html

=head2 MSWin32: can't disable crlf trans. on STDxxx using :raw or binmode (#41034)

Vaclav Ovsik reported a problem with end-of-line markers on Windows. He
was not able to disable end-of-line translations on files opened by default
(such as C<STDOUT> and C<STDERR>, but files opened afterwards were just fine.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-12/msg00054.html

=head2 Perl5 Bug Summary

We almost crept under the 1500 barrier this week.

  Once more into the breech
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-11/msg00990.html

  http://rt.perl.org/rt3/NoAuth/perl5/Overview.html

=head1 New Core Modules

=over 4

=item *

C<IPC::Cmd> achieved core status this week. Steve Hay tweaked it slightly
to fix a test problem on Windows.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-11/msg01012.html

=item *

C<threads> moved onto version 1.53. This corrected some of the problems
that Steve Hay was experiencing with his smoke machine, but now he saw
that the test suite was hanging on a different test.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-11/msg00998.html

=item *

C<File::Fetch> made it to the core. Johan Vromans wondered why this
functionality was not added to C<LWP::UserAgent>. The reason is that
C<File::Fetch> is a wrapper for any number of command-line tools
and protocols than can be used to fetch a file (such as C<rsync>,
C<LWP> itself, C<curl>, C<wget> and the like).

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-12/msg00012.html

=back

=head1 In Brief

Nicholas Clark taught the B<Aho-Corasick regexp patch> how to behave
in the presence of threads.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-11/msg00985.html

H.Merijn Brand discovered that B<C<PerlIO::Scalar> ignores C<format> and
C<write>>, preferring instead to send the output to C<STDOUT>, instead of
the associated variable.

  The last user of formats in the world
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-11/msg01003.html

B<C<Time::Piece> is back> from the future.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-11/msg01015.html

David Landgren discovered that B<a literal before C<< \kE<lt>fooE<gt> >> (a
named back reference)> can really ruin a conference talk. Yves Orton
resolved the problem in 20 minutes, give or take a few.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-11/msg01031.html

The B<5.8.3 C<sprintf> patch> made its way into the B<Mac OS X Security Update 2006-007>.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-11/msg01040.html

Paul Marquess independently rediscovered the joy of B<testing
filehandles with threaded 5.6.x> perls, and decided to give it
a wide berth.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-11/msg01041.html
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-12/msg00014.html

Bo Lindbergh B<proposed adding lexical scope to C<SelfLoader>>, complete
with patch, but elicited no comments.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-11/msg01051.html

Gabor Szabo and Abe Timmerman talked about the B<broken pages on
db.test-smoke.org>. 

  In November
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-11/msg01096.html

  and in December
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-12/msg00004.html

Yves Orton had some B<unhappy results with C<Time::HiRes>>. After
an incredibly long thread, everything was sorted out.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-11/msg01099.html

Johan Vromans was worried that B<adding C<Module::Load::Conditional>
to the core> would be like unleashing Pandora's box.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-12/msg00017.html

Yves Orton wanted to know whether 'twas B<better to merge bugs or set
up dependencies>.

  Whatever lowers the count most
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-12/msg00020.html

Jarkko tried in vain to sort out B<the UTF-8 -related failures>
that have been occurring in the smokes since August. Nicholas
Clark explained the difficulties.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-12/msg00028.html

Jarkko added some things to think about in C<perltodo>.

  Nick's movie
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-12/msg00036.html

Jim Cromie noticed that the B<C<install> target misses
C<Compress/IO/{Base,Zlib}>>. The ideal solution involves using a
more orthodox directory layout for the modules: C<Configure> gets
too confused otherwise.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-12/msg00044.html

Rob "Sisyphus" puzzled over B<integer exponentiation under
C<-Duse64bitint> on Cygwin>, wondering why the same result could
be stored as an NV (a float) or an IV (an integer). Nicholas
Clark could no longer remember why, only that it was a conscious
design decision not to do integer exponentiation.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-12/msg00050.html

=head2 About this summary

This summary was written by David Landgren.

Weekly summaries are published on F<http://use.perl.org/> and posted
on a mailing list, (subscription: F<perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org>).
The archive is at F<http://dev.perl.org/perl5/list-summaries/>.
Corrections and comments are welcome.

If you found this summary useful, please consider contributing to
the Perl Foundation to help support the development of Perl.
