=head1 This Week on perl5-porters - 16-22 October 2006

I<"And if the best we can come up with is numeric error codes then
I'm going to break out the bell bottoms and have a disco party, you
groove machine."> -- Michael G. Schwern, shaking his bootie at
chromatic's suggestion for solving the diagnostics dilemma.

=head1 Topics of Interest

=head2 New C<version> diagnostic breaks a bunch of modules

Last week, we learnt that changes in C<version> caused failures in
some of Michael G. Schwern's modules, and John Peacock chided him
gently for hard-wiring the exact text into his test suites.

This week, chromatic floated the idea of assigning numeric codes to
each diagnostic, in order to return a string or numeric value
depending on the context.

The discussion touched on the issues of localisation of diagnostics
and ways of insulating client code from changes in them. Yves Orton
pointed out that many messages have changed in C<blead> to provide
more information.

Michael pondered the fact that C<$@> could be extended to include
method calls, which might be a way of obtaining more information
about error conditions.

By the end of the week, a potential design involving and C<errorcode>
module had been sketched out.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-10/msg00475.html

=head2 Regexp substitution failures on VMS

Craig A. Berry had a closer look at change #28770, applied by Nicholas
Clark late last month, which has been causing test failures on VMS ever
since. Since the problems don't appear to be happening on other
platforms, Craig wondered if alignment issues were rearing their
ugly heads.

Nicholas proposed a patch that he hoped would fix the problem. Which
in fact, it did. It turned out that the problem was no so much one
of alignment, but that the C<bool> datatype turned out to consume
32 bits, since it fails to be configured as anything smaller at
configure time.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-10/msg00448.html

=head2 Perl (5.8.4) process spinning in C<perl_destruct> and consuming all available CPU

Karsten Sperling was having problems with a proprietary application written
in Perl getting wedged during C<perl_destruct>, and sucking all the CPU out
of the machine.

Dave Mitchell thought that the symptoms didn't sound familiar, and outlined
a couple of scenarios that might be happening, and how to examine them.
Karsten, fortunately a dab hand with C<gdb> was able to peer inside the
application and see what was going on.

Unfortunately, he lacked the knowledge to interpret a CV structure that
looked suspicious. Dave gave him a couple of tips for that as well, and
cheerfully suggested that when the problem is understood, the bug will
be in the proprietary XS code.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-10/msg00459.html

=head2 Bug in F<regexec.c> - invalid pointer saved on stack?

David Bailey was encountering problem of corrupted memory with
5.8.8.  He believed that it was due a complex regular expression
with evaluated substitutions causing Perl's stack to be relocated
during the substitution. This causes bad things to go haywire when
the code pops out the other side.

He even went as far as identifying the line that he thought was the
source of the problem, and asked for help to get it fixed.

  *crickets chirping*
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-10/msg00461.html

=head2 Regular expression performance benchmarks

H.Merijn Brand benchmarked the various combination of matching with
C</g>, capturing, and list/scalar context and wondered why there
were two orders of magnitude of difference between the two worst
all all the other combinations.

John W. Krahn proposed a better benchmark that exercised list context
more accurately. In his version, the spread was no more than a
quarter from best to worst. Sadahiro Tomoyuki had a number of
interesting insights into how captures and C</g> interact.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-10/msg00462.html

=head2 The C<_> prototype, first round

After last week's nudge from Yves Orton, Rafaël Garcia-Suarez
landed the first first of the C<_> (underscore) prototype character,
which indicates that a routine operates on C<$_> by default.

He added various fixes and tests in a subsequent update, and announced
that he intended to modify the C<prototype()> function to return '_'
where needed.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-10/msg00470.html

=head2 stack assumptions broken

Someone over in Debian land wrote some very sick Perl that caused the
interpreter to panic. And Nicholas Clark couldn't see an easy way to
fix it (that is, that doesn't have an impact on performance).

  The discussion
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-10/msg00481.html

  The bug report
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-10/msg00485.html

=head2 UTF-8 regexp performance problem

Ben Evans identified a performance problem with the regular expression
engine, if the UTF-8 flag is set on the scalar being matched against.

Nicholas Clark profiled the code and applied this obvious fix. This
caused the non-linear performance slide back to close to linear.
Unfortunately a number of regression tests started failing as a
result, which means that the fix is at simple or easy as Nicholas
had first hoped.

At fault is the C<\C> regexp directive, which Yves Orton hates and
wished it could be removed.

Dave Mitchell realised that the problem is caused by a zero
match length, which causes C<strlen()> to be called at some
point, and proposed a fix. He did agree with Yves in that C<\C>
should be deprecated, and said that 5.10 should issue a
compile-time warning.

Yves suggested a tweak to Dave's patch, which Dave applied.
Mike Guy then suggested a clever tweak to the tweak.

Other mutterings in the thread were heard, suggesting the
deprecation of C<pack>'s C0/U0 directives.

Tels thought that the regexp was screwed up anyway, and
suggested a superior approach, and that a bug report should
be filed with C<Net::SMTP> (which is where the pattern
hails from).

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-10/msg00492.html

=head2 Change 29050: Memory leak fix, by Jarkko

Yves Orton spent some time trying to figure out why Windows-specific
code in C<blead> was ending up calling Unix IO routines, with
obviously unhappy results. Similarly, Jan Dubois noticed a memory
leak provoked a bad problem with Perl IO layers on Windows, especially
threads.

This prompted Craig Berry to note that the build-up and
tear-down code for this business was also a bit of a mess
on VMS as well.

Nicholas was already working on the problem, and asked if
the patch he was working on solve the problem for VMS.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-10/msg00526.html

=head2 blead valgrind finding

Jarkko found a leak thanks to C<valgrind>, and this was applied
(not the same change as discussed above). Unfortunately, it came
to grief on a 6-CPU SMP box. Jarkko sighed, and vowed to study the
memory pool code more closely.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-10/msg00483.html

=head2 Perl support for C<sfio>

JD Brennan filed bug report #40568 to say that the documentation
concerning C<sfio> (Safe, Fast I/O) pointed to an URI that no
longer existed, and supplied a working address.

Andy Dougherty pointed out that it is no longer documented in the
F<INSTALL> file (although the code for it hasn't been removed from
the codebase yet). What is needed is for someone (JD?) to express
an interest in maintaining it, otherwise the writing is on the
wall.

  Where's my chainsaw?
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-10/msg00543.html

As it turned out, JD had no luck building Perl 5.8.8 with C<sfio>
on Solaris. The trouble appears to stem from the fact that the sfio
code appears to be completely ignorant of all the work that has
gone into IO layers in the past few years. Perhaps the clearest
sign yet that bitrot has begun to set in.

  Paging all sfio gurus
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-10/msg00547.html

=head2 Changing the internal encoding

Juerd Waalboer wanted to know, following on from the UTF-8 regexp
performance thread, how easy it would be to change the internal
Unicode encoding used, and suggested that bitwise negated UTF-8
would be an excellent way of smoking out implicit assumptions in
the code base.

The short answer is that, while this would be desirable, it would
take a considerable amount of effort. Even existing non-mainstream
internal encoding systems, like UTF-EBCDIC are still bringing
bugs in core to light.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-10/msg00553.html

=head2 Managing changes to dual-lifed modules

Jerry D. Hedden wondered why some of the changes he made to the
threads modules were omitted when C<blead> was updated, and
wondered what the reason was.

This led to considerable debate as to how changes should be
made to dual-lifed modules should be made, and how C<blead>
and C<maint> are kept synchronised.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-10/msg00581.html

=head2 make C<test.valgrind> capable of running C<cachegrind>

Jim Cromie sent in a patch that tweaked the core test harness
to make C<test.valgrind> run C<cachegrind>, which apparently
calculates the cache miss rates of executed code.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-10/msg00578.html

=head2 Why aren't C<%Carp::Internal> and C<%Carp::CarpInternal documented>?

Ben Tilly had a number of problems with the way the C<Carp> module was
documented, as it could lead to people doing things in a sub-optimal
manner. After a slight prodding, he coughed up an excellent documentation
cleanup, and some tests for the test suite.

This discussion followed on from last week's thread about C<Carp::Clan>.
Ben Tilly suggested that one of the main things needed to be done
first up was to dual-life C<Carp>, which would then allow C<Carp::Clan>
to specify it as a dependency.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-10/msg00617.html

=head2 Patch statistics

H.Merijn Brand went on a munging spree on the patch database and
discovered that Jarkko Hietaniemi was the most prolific patcher,
having produced about as many as everyone else combined.

The most patches were added in 2001, although things have picked
up since 2004.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-10/msg00614.html

=head1 Patches of Interest

=head2 Taking a stab at C<UNITCHECK> blocks

Alex Gough delivered a first cut at adding C<UNITCHECK> blocks (code
which is run just after the file or unit has been compiled. Joshua
ben Jore wanted to know why they weren't named C<CHECK>, as in Perl 6.

As it turns out, C<CHECK> blocks already exist in Perl 5, but they
aren't quite as exactly useful as people hoped, because they don't
serve the purpose that people think they do. Perl 6, with the benefit
of hindsight, gets it right, but to add this functionality to Perl 5
means that the blocks need a another name.

Rafael applied the changes to C<blead>. Alex then patched C<B> to
teach it how to deal with them.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-10/msg00490.html

=head2 Inheriting from yourself

Curtis "Ovid" Poe wasted more time than he cared to admit when he
declared a package, and then declared it to be a base package of
itself, (which meant that it would try to inherit from itself). The
trouble was that it didn't work, and no diagnostics were issued
which would have shed light on the issue.

(I marvel that after all this time, bugs like this, that seem so
blindingly obvious I<in hindsight>, still pop up from time to time).

So he patched F<base.pm> to kick out an error message when this
happens, and he also updated the test suite to test for it. Rafael
applied the change to C<blead>.

  I am the son and the heir
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-10/msg00496.html

=head2 F<Configure> patch for C<5.\d\d.\d+>

H.Merijn Brand delivered a first cut at getting F<Configure> to sort
5.8.10 and 5.10.0 into their correct places, in the grand scheme of
Perl releases.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-10/msg00615.html

=head1 New and old bugs from RT

=head2 pipe doesn't set close-on-exec (#1724)

Steve Peters noted that this bug was resolved in 5.6.1.

  about time, too!
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-10/msg00515.html

=head2 C<(;$)> prototype still doesn't work properly (#3497)

Rafaël noted that this has been fixed in C<blead>, with the addition
of the C<(_)> prototype.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-10/msg00494.html

=head2 Solaris 10 x86 C<semctl()> unimplemented error due to Configure C<IPC_STAT> test (#40547)

A sysadmin at pacific.net noticed that C<semctl()> was incorrectly reported
as being unimplemented on his platform. He tracked the problem down to a missing
C<#define> in F<config.h>, and was then in business. Rafaël assumed that this
was a bag in the Solaris hints file that needed to be fixed.

Andy Dougherty was surprised, because his Solaris machine figured this out
all by itself. He extracted the configure test out into a stand-alone test,
and asked the original poster to report what it does on his machine. Alas,
we didn't hear back from him.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-10/msg00457.html

regexec.c saves context stack position improperly (#40557)
http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-10/msg00472.html

=head2 Windows fork emulation's child pseudo process cannot restore local scalar values (#40565)

Eirik Berg Hanssen posted a well thought out bug report, showing
that a variable that is localised (via C<local>) in a block loses
its previous definition when it come out of the block (but the
code works as expected if run in the parent).

At best, one gets an an C<undef>, but play your cards right, and you can
wind up with an C<Attempt to free unreferenced scalar>. Adding to Eirik's
perplexity was the fact that arrays, hashes and globs display the
correct behaviour.

  Paging all Win32 experts
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-10/msg00487.html

=head2 ++side effects++ (#40570)

Dr. Ruud wondered why C<0 + ++$x + $x++> is not the same as C<++$x + $x++>.
Dave Mitchell gave a cogent explanation about what happens in the internals
in such constructs (basically, there's a performance optimisation that
cheats a bit).

Nicholas Clark came down in favour on maintaining the current situation,
pointing out that such horrendously bad code should be caught in a code
review.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-10/msg00544.html

=head2 Perl5 Bug Summary

  3 up, 2 down, 1527 total
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-10/msg00454.html

  http://rt.perl.org/rt3/NoAuth/perl5/Overview.html

=head1 New Core Modules

=over 4

=item *

C<Log::Message> and C<Log::Message::Simple> have been added to the core.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-10/msg00493.html

=item *

C<CPANPLUS> 0.077_02, propagating to a mirror near you soon.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-10/msg00565.html

=back

=head1 In Brief

Yves Orton corrected the B<off-by-one error in the trie code>, and fixed
up a problem with F<test.pl>. Nicholas Clark applied both patches.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-10/msg00455.html

Yuval Yaari noticed that B<C<re.pm>'s documentation had not caught up>
with the new behaviour.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2006-10/msg00473.html

=head2 About this summary

This summary was written by David Landgren. There will be no summary
next week -- I already know I won't have the time to do it. The
following summary will cover the fortnight.

Weekly summaries are published on F<http://use.perl.org/> and posted
on a mailing list, (subscription: F<perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org>).
The archive is at F<http://dev.perl.org/perl5/list-summaries/>.
Corrections and comments are welcome.

If you found this summary useful, please consider contributing to
the Perl Foundation to help support the development of Perl.
