=head1 An overview of the testing modules available on CPAN

CPAN is filled with great modules to help you test your code.  Here's a
short list of what's available, so you don't reinvent the wheel.

If you have a module to add to the list, please email
C<andy@petdance.com>.

=head1 General testing modules

=head2 Test::AtRuntime

Assertion-like testing while your program runs.

=head2 Test::Benchmark

Compares two functions to ensure one is faster than another:

    use Test::Benchmark;

    is_faster(-10, sub {...}, sub {...}, "this is faster than that")

=head2 Test::Class

xUnit style testing that works well with C<Test::Builder> based modules
(the majority of other testing modules). This means it can integrate
into an existing setup relatively easily.

=head2 Test::Cmd

Testing of scripts/programs by their external interface rather than
innards.

=head2 Test::Data

Comprises 4 submodules that provide a number of functions to test the
contents of arrays, hashes, scalars and functions.  These make it easy
to test various boundaries and edge cases without writing much code.

=head2 Test::Debugger

Emits a trace of the test script to file, for perusal in the event
of failures.

=head2 Test::Deep

Extremely flexible and powerful deep comparisons of data structures. Ideal
for testing that a given structure not only is equal to an ideal model,
but also for determining whether they are similar. Also good for checking
lightly nested structures (e.g. that a response from an address book
query has well formed records).

=head2 Test::Differences

Tests long strings and data structures, giving a readable output (unlike
testing long strings with C<Test::More>'s C<is> function).

=head2 Test::Extreme

Another xUnit-ish testing framework. Very easy to use.  Able to output
both xUnit style and traditional Perl style.

=head2 Test::FIT

Provides a CGI interface to writing and running test suites.

=head2 Test::File

Tests file attributes (empty, of particular sizes, readable, executable,
writeable, etc.).

=head2 Test::Inline

Allows you to embed your tests in your POD in your program file, thus
allowing you to test while you document, or test while you code, or
both. One sideeffect is that your sample code can be test code.

=head2 Test::LectroTest

LectroTest is an automatic, specification-based testing tool for Perl.
The project was inspired by Koen Claessen and John Hughes's QuickCheck
for the Haskell programming language.

Testing a hypothetical square function:

    Property {
          ##[ x <- Int #]##
          square( $x ) == $x * $x;
    }, name => "Finding $x's square";

=head2 Test::LongString

Testing of long strings, allowing one to see precisely where the
inequality, or non-match, is with ease.

=head2 Test::ManyParams

Combinatorial subroutine argument testing. Lets you test every combination
of arguments to a function.

=head2 Test::MockModule

Easily override subroutines in a module for unit testing.

=head2 Test::MockObject

Lets you create objects that respond to methods in particular ways,
thus letting you test how your own code handles objects with such
return values.

=head2 Test::More

The most common testing module to use. Appropriate feature set for the
majority of test cases and now standard in Perl (from 5.6.2 and 5.8.0).

=head2 Test::Reporter

Module to let you send F<make test> results to the CPAN testers.  Includes
the handy F<cpantest> program to make command-line reporting easy.

=head2 Test::Simple

The basic testing module, which you'll rarely want to use on its own,
since C<Test::More> completely supercedes it.

=head2 Test::SimpleUnit

Unit test wrapper functions around the standard testing functions.
Allows you to specify setup functions, plus teardown functions to get
run in the case of failure.

=head2 Test::Smoke

Framework for testing distributions of Perl itself.  Not normally used
by the general public.

=head2 Test::Unit

JUnit testing for Perl.

=head2 Test::Verbose

Runs verbose tests on a test file.  Seems to be obviated by the F<prove>
program now included with C<Test::Harness>.

=head1 Database testing modules

=head2 DBD::Mock

DBD::Mock is a DBI-compliant database driver that allows you to prepare
and execute SQL statements, seed resultsets, and inspect the results of
all calls.

An example from the SYNOPSIS:

    use DBI;

    # ...connect as normal, using 'Mock' as your driver name
    my $dbh = DBI->connect( 'DBI:Mock:', '', '' )
                  || die "Cannot create handle: $DBI::errstr\n";

    # ...create a statement handle as normal and execute with parameters
    my $sth = $dbh->prepare( 'SELECT this, that FROM foo WHERE id = ?' );
    $sth->execute( 15 );

    # Now query the statement handle as to what has been done with it
    my $params = $sth->{mock_params};
    print "Used statement: ", $sth->{mock_statement}, "\n",
          "Bound parameters: ", join( ', ', @{ $params } ), "\n";

=head2 Test::DatabaseRow

Given a DBI database handle, can test to see if the database contains
tables with particular rows. Useful for testing that database
modifications went well.

    # SQL-based test
    row_ok( sql   => "SELECT * FROM contacts WHERE cid = '123'",
            tests => [ name => "trelane" ],
            label => "contact 123's name is trelane");

    # test with shortcuts
    row_ok( table => "contacts",
            where => [ cid => 123 ],
            tests => [ name => "trelane" ],
            label => "contact 123's name is trelane");

=head1 Data-specific testing modules

=head2 Test::Env

Tests that one's environment has appropriate data.

=head2 Test::Files

Tests files and directories have particular contents.

=head2 Test::ISBN

Verify ISBNs and parts of ISBNs against C<Business::ISBN>.

=head2 Test::Mail

Testing that email is sent and received properly.

=head2 Test::XML

Helper functions for testing XML for syntactic equivalency, even if the
strings themselves are different.

=head1 Web testing modules

=head2 Apache::Test

Allows you to run tests for Apache-based software.  Also lets you run
tests inside Apache.  Not limited to mod_perl.

=over

=item * Introductory tutorial slides

L<http://www.modperlcookbook.org/~geoff/slides/ApacheCon/2003/apache-test-printable.ppt.gz>

=item * perl.com article on Apache::Test

L<http://www.perl.com/pub/a/2003/05/22/testing.html>

=item * Docs from apache.org

L<http://perl.apache.org/docs/general/testing/testing.html>

=back

=head2 Test::HTML::Content

Tests HTML has (or hasn't) particular links, text, tags, comments and
such. Very useful for testing websites (see also C<WWW::Mechanize> and
C<Test:HTML::Lint>).

=head2 Test::HTML::Lint

Checks that HTML is well formed as per C<HTML::Lint>.

=head2 Test::HTML::Tidy

Checks that HTML is well formed as per C<HTML::Tidy>.

=head2 Test::HTTPStatus

Ensures HTTP responses have appropriate values.

=head2 Test::WWW::Mechanize

Subclass of C<WWW::Mechanize> with convenience methods for automated testing.

=head1 Module-testing modules

=head2 Test::Builder::Tester

Runs tests on other C<Test::> modules based on C<Test::Builder>.

=head2 Test::Distribution

Performs basic Kwalitee checking on modules: checks that they have well
formed POD, they compile, they all define the same C<$VERSION>, they
have their prerequisites in the F<Makefile.PL> and that some standard
files exist.

=head2 Test::Exception

Testing that bits of code die or don't die appropriately, and with the
right errors.

=head2 Test::Manifest

Executes your tests in a particular non-alphabetic order without having
to name them with numeric prefixes.

=head2 Test::NoWarnings

Test for making sure that your test didn't emit any warnings.

=head2 Test::Pod

Checks a given POD or Perl file for syntactic validity.  Also has a
function to let you easily check all files in your distribution at once.

=head2 Test::Pod::Coverage

Checks a given POD or Perl file for syntactic validity.  Also has a
function to let you easily check all files in your distribution at once.

=head2 Test::Portability::Files

Checks the portability the names of the files in a distribution.
The tests use the advice listed in F<perlport>, section "Files and
Filesystems".

=head2 Test::Prereq

Checks that your F<Makefile.PL> has the proper prerequisites specified.

=head2 Test::Signature

Verifies that the signature of a module, as created by
C<Module::Signature>, is correct.

=head2 Test::Tester

Runs tests on other C<Test::> modules based on C<Test::Builder>.

=head2 Test::Version

Checks module files for proper version information.

=head2 Test::Warn

Handy module for testing code that might throw a warning.  The testing
function captures any warnings, so you can check them against a regex.

For example, this code checks that C<WWW::Mechanize>'s C<warn()> method
does indeed throw a warning.

    my $m = WWW::Mechanize->new;
    isa_ok( $m, 'WWW::Mechanize' );

    warning_like {
        $m->warn( "Something bad" );
    } qr/Something bad.+line \d+/, 
        "Passes the message, and includes the line number";

=head2 Test::Without::Module

Allows you to deliberately hide modules from a program even though they
are installed. This is mostly useful for testing modules that have a
fallback when a certain dependency module is not installed.

=head1 CONTRIBUTORS

The following people have helped contribute to this page:
Andy Lester,
Dominic Mitchell
Philipe 'BooK' Bruhat,
Chris Winters,
Per Christian Nødtved,
and the late, great Iain Truskett.

