=head1 Perl 6 Summary for 2006-01-10 though 2006-01-24

All~

Welcome to another fortnight's summary.  This summary marks a return to a Tuesday schedule for summaries.  Hopefully this will help me get summaries to you on time.  Oddly appropriate that I just started reading Don Quixote...

=head2 Perl 6 Compiler

Either this list followed its typical pattern of doing most of its work off list, or google's indexing of it broke.  I am guess the former and continuing on blindly.

=head2 Perl 6 Internals

=head3 Unescapable Single Quotes in Strings

Matt Diephouse discovered that he could not escape single quotes within strings.  This saddened him so much he open an RT ticket.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/6fd1fe6d523590fb/accc880c283b074b#accc880c283b074b>



=head3 C< genfile() > Interpolation Syntax

Joshua Hoblitt changed the interpolation syntax for C< Parrot::Configure::Step::genfile() > from C< ${foo} > to C< @foo@ >.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/a4d8b5fefa8ce7b4/bef2917a6e6c21ba#bef2917a6e6c21ba>



=head3 getopt_obt.t Failures

Joshua Hoblitt posted some failures in C< t/library/getopt_obj.t > on amd64/linux.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/b6dce10960174c06/5a20f5f4326b861f#5a20f5f4326b861f>



=head3 Improved Smoke Layout

Joshua Hoblitt opened a TODO for the smoke server's layout.  Currently it is a bit busy and confusing.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/c8ebf43f670e98b1/da17fae7ca0f4d9b#da17fae7ca0f4d9b>



=head3 Deprecated PMCs

Leo deprecated FloatvalArray and StringArray PMC in favor of the (Fixed|Resizable)*Array PMCs, which are 20% more awesome.*

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/ab631602d56488a2/2f7dcf037ea477df#2f7dcf037ea477df>



*awesomeness directly related to their original author

=head3 pdb.exe build broken

Jerry Gay noted that pdb.exe was failing to link on Windows.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/5758029bec6d82d9/9053c0cfa0a93e0f#9053c0cfa0a93e0f>



=head3 Interpolation Synatx Updates

Greg Bacon noticed a few C< ${foo} > interpolations left over from the aforementioned update.  Nick Glencross improved upon Greg's core idea.  Joshua Hoblitt verified the fixes.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/7c2df5feeec172e1/344eca980e36b6ea#344eca980e36b6ea>



=head3 Attack of the Clones

Klaas-Jan Stol was having trouble making his LuaNil PMC clone method.  Leo explained that it was his fault, and he solved it.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/f9fafbd31726b0bb/2fa792f2afba0ddb#2fa792f2afba0ddb>



=head3 LuaNil Morphing

Klaas-Jan Stol proffered a patch which changed LuaNil from a singleton and made it morph to other Lua types when asked.  Warnock applies.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/e1b5f37a688396e9/f5a2129824c0b91f#f5a2129824c0b91f>



=head3 LuaTable Loving

Klaas-Jan Stol also provided a patch making LuaTable more correct.  Warnock applies.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/cbc26ace9aed177c/cf6bb7a0a7622665#cf6bb7a0a7622665>



=head3 Lua Fixes

Jonathan Worthington updated Lua PMCs to no longer use the deprecated Parrot_PMC_typenum.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/cbc26ace9aed177c/cf6bb7a0a7622665#cf6bb7a0a7622665>



=head3 Tcl on Darwin

Joshua Isom noticed that Tcl was no longer building on Darwin.  Jonathan Worthington updated Tcl PMCs to no longer use the deprecated Parrot_PMC_typenum.  Joshua noted that this fixed one problem but left another one.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/bd5841582503f9fe/760f31cb3defedc2#760f31cb3defedc2>



=head3 No More .def Files

Jonathan Worthington completed the work that allows Parrot to build on Win32 without a .def file.  Thanks, Jonathan.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/12b143bfb61985ee/04dcfd91378acfcd#04dcfd91378acfcd>



=head3 Moving argv to ResizableStringArray

Joshua Isom (after Leo's earlier help) offered a patch moving argv from an SArray to a ResizableStringArray.  Warnock applies.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/875b13effc35604c/a2af4fcb1e9d9920#a2af4fcb1e9d9920> -- inital version


L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/33b23b44b6cac3e5/26a7c2f30b22bffc#26a7c2f30b22bffc> -- final version



=head3 Pod File Extensions

Joshua Isom noted that many documents were pod documents, but did not have .pod extensions.  Joshua Hoblitt fixed it.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/3e68e0ebc2b6b15a/45291788ebbce420#45291788ebbce420>



=head3 Switch Tcl to Getopt/Obj.pir

Bernhard Schmalhofer suggested that Tcl could be moved to Getopt/Obj.pir from Getopt/Long.pir, which clears the path for remove of Getopt/Long.pir.  Will Coleda gave the go ahead for switching it.  

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/1e55d61d558b25b8/0a0ccea4e6a36746#0a0ccea4e6a36746>



=head3 clear_eh restrictions

Bob Rogers posted an update to his patch which restricts C< clear_eh > to the current context only.  Warnock applies.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/fdc7033d01108917/e8235caab47051bb#e8235caab47051bb>



=head3 Clean Up After Yourself

Bob Rogers provided a patch which makes C< examples/pir/io.pir > clean up its temp file.  Warnock applies.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/91e208f46454c8cd/09139070babb0ffa#09139070babb0ffa>



=head3 Build Failure on FreeBSD 5.4

Joshua Isom noted that the build was failing on FreeBSD 5.4.   Apparently the cgp core was a little hard on their gcc.  Leo disabled the portion it was breaking on.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/461737888bd1dc1a/7a165108815387c9#7a165108815387c9>



L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/461737888bd1dc1a/7a165108815387c9#7a165108815387c9>



=head3 C< get_param > Questions

Klaas-Jan Stol had a few questions about get_param usage in PIR.  Bob Rogers and Leo provided answers.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/49ae9f270be850ad/832de1166c0f7d2f#832de1166c0f7d2f>



=head3 C<find_global> Opcode Change

Leo updated C<find_global> and C<get_global> to return a Null PMC on failure when exceptions are disabled.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/1575712bbee0c152/04d4a7ac1b7529bf#04d4a7ac1b7529bf>



=head3 Build Step Parameter Passing

Joshua Hoblitt added support for passing parameters to build steps in the build system.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/483e26dcd07dc09d/8ff65d04840af18b#8ff65d04840af18b>



=head3 Automatic Closure Creation

Audrey found it cumbersome to need to explicitly create new closures for package-scoped subroutines. Leo made it automatic.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/92e001a480090b7a/d1214d2c3380d144#d1214d2c3380d144>



=head3 YAML::Emitter::Syck wanted

Will Coleda opened a todo for a C<YAML::Emitter::Syck> that functions similarly to C<Data::Dumper>.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/60b00f89765b2e15/ec21572859b858b5#ec21572859b858b5>



=head3 PMC Introspection

Will Coleda wants an API for introspecting PMCs from PASM.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/9606000865dcfd5a/190adee09aeafba1#190adee09aeafba1>



=head3 FrOSCon Call For Papers

Marcus Thiesen announced that the first Free and Open Source Conference is looking for papers in both English and German.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/03bca46294730b5c/7a5871ca512e653c#7a5871ca512e653c>



=head3 YAML::Parser::Syck

Bernhard Schmalhofer posted a brief look at what has already been done with adding support of libsyck and left the door open to anyone who wished to pick up the torch.  Warnock applies.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/435254bd782c519b/5a94cf7a32769546#5a94cf7a32769546>



=head3 Parrot Link Issues

Klaas-Jan Stol had problems linking parrot.  Larry managed to track the problem down to an old libparrot in C</usr/local/lib> being picked up prematurely.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/c58d9501f8649ef0/3f00b40b3aa9669d#3f00b40b3aa9669d>



=head3 Parrot_Context Unused Field

Bob Rogers posted a patch which improved the name of an unused field in Parrot_Context.  Leo applied the patch.  Matt Fowles wondered why leave the unused pointer in at all.  Leo explained that it was need for mark_register_stack to work out correctly, although another pointer could be moved over it to save those 4 bytes (or even 8 on 64 bit platforms!).

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/fd481bd45e606646/34bdcaae8560ef55#34bdcaae8560ef55>



=head3 gunie.g Question

Chris Dolan was curious why print was an expression and not a statement in the punie grammar.  Andrew Rodland explained that print was an expression because it return a value (success or failure).

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/94808ac38d33d3c3/45351c7c21bbe13a#45351c7c21bbe13a>



=head3 genrpt.pl is Obsolete

Bernhard Schmalhofer noticed that C<tools/dev/genrpt.pl> does the same thing as parrotbug and could thus be removed.  Joshua Hoblitt agreed.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/c24d7dedf29373ec/fd80e6762783d1b1#fd80e6762783d1b1>



=head3 Parrot::Config Contains Invalid Info

  Jerry Gay noticed that his Parrot::Config was being created with invalid data.  Joshua Hoblitt offered to clean up one problem and asked for takers on another.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/adfc288bf534b420/5a177fff74b67cd6#5a177fff74b67cd6>



=head3 Rename C<src/classes> to C<src/pmc>

Bernhard Schmalhofer proposed and performed, after favorable reception of his proposal, a migration from directories name C<src/classes> to C<src/pmc>.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/1ad793be90c81d3b/81b53914ad2d1b76#81b53914ad2d1b76>



=head3 Out of Date Comments

Brad Bowman noticed some comments refering to C<cache.*> in C<pobj.h>.  He provided a patch to remove them.  Warnock applies.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/4d6184c36378ad68/93391a076040405b#93391a076040405b>



=head3 C< compute_dominance_frontiers > Bug

Bob Rogers found a problem in C< compute_dominance_frontiers >.  Curtis Rawls suggested simply disabling the function as it was merely a precursor to SSA which was never finished.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/f4bb948f516436e2/e4d5b75eb7ec2392#e4d5b75eb7ec2392>



=head3 Closure::mark Segfault

Bob Rogers found a fixed a segfault in Closure::mark.  Leo applied the patch.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/bde9b842c8241ee5/70f376053598786c#70f376053598786c>



=head3 Parrot CPAN Bundle?

Jerry Gay suggested making a CPAN Bundle (or possibly several) for Parrot.  Chip liked the idea of having one bundle, and thought that having several sub-bundles would be more effort than it might be worth.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/1aaba0ad30aacd91/18e9ee88e9e15f0c#18e9ee88e9e15f0c>



=head3 Calling Conventions Details

Leo had a few questions about pdd03 (calling conventions).  Chip provided clarifications.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/d734a002915bb692/9efc3ef4b808f3d6#9efc3ef4b808f3d6>



=head3 PDD11 Bit Rot

Brad Bowman noticed a bit of rot in pdd11 and polished it up.  Jerry Gay applied the patch.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/451a7f576977356f/8b9a6eba638091a0#8b9a6eba638091a0>



=head3 Named Argument Passing

Leo proposed a way of passing named arguments in PIR.  Response was favorable, and he implemented it.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/d73bba23444c6f28/73edcb5c4218aceb#73edcb5c4218aceb> -- proposal


L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/d0245edf7ca01495/b8057f7d4b58b27d#b8057f7d4b58b27d> -- implementation



=head3 LuaTables of Floats

Klaas-Jan Stol wondered how to use N values as keys.  Leo suggested using Float PMCs and Matt Fowles warned of the danger of using floating point values where equality checks might be needed.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/d5f1e1347d3e5dbb/308171fcc87e1fe8#308171fcc87e1fe8>



=head3 Argument Passing Bug

Bob Rogers found an issue with the :optional to :slurpy state transition in process_args, so he fixed it.  Leo applied the patch.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/3894efed50cda243/bc71c9f02d424f6e#bc71c9f02d424f6e>



=head3 Object Initialization Changes

Bob Rogers noticed some changes the semantics of object initialization.  He sent a patch with more tests, but Warnock applies.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/74ec6e6999edc87b/fc458d1ecc0df83c#fc458d1ecc0df83c>



=head3 Assertion Failure in Life

Tim Bunce found an assertion failure in C<ncurses_life.pir>.  Leo fixed the problem.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/1adafbc88b2c458b/22b42b8bb1c0c147#22b42b8bb1c0c147>



=head3 ncurses files

Tim Bunce found several different ncurses files in C<runtime/parrot/library/> and asked which were generated from the others.  Leo explained that ncurses.pasm was generated from ncurses.declarations, but that ncurses.pir was hand made.  He suggested splitting them into to parts, one for libncurses and another for libform NCI functions.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/7f7e66eda914a5dd/457814abff3cfcfd#457814abff3cfcfd>



=head3 Cygwin Build Failures

Greg Bacon was having build troubles on Cygwin.  After much work, still no resolution.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/bc7deffc4ae04dc2/86aab13cf1d8e100#86aab13cf1d8e100>



=head3 HP-UX Alignment Issues

Nick Glencross found a failing assertion on HP-UX.  Leo suggested disabling function pointer alignment on this system since it dist not appear to be working.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/4da9be85f17d5894/4ffc7ef674708bb9#4ffc7ef674708bb9>



=head3 .const improvements

François Perrad noticed that .const was not working with LuaPMCs.  Leo explained that a PMC had to implement new_from_string for .const to work.  Klass-Jan Stol added support for it to LuaNumber.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/9f2e92cec1f881a1/727d149fbd2b36b4#727d149fbd2b36b4>



=head3 method_util unused

Leo noticed method_util.c and .h.  He also noticed that they were unused.  Shortly he is going to remove them.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/fa036bb8e2f15c61/0f8a3599b8612d5f#0f8a3599b8612d5f>



=head3 0.4.1 Build Erros on OSX

WangKe was having trouble building 0.4.1 on his shiny new OS X 10.4.3 Intel.  I think he may have a completely untested combination of endianess and OS for us...  Sadly he was posting to google groups and not the list.  Perhaps some kind soul will help him.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/e1a48541a732c47e/225afb52b7fe07d7?utoken=xmIfgTcAAADWXQ4sS--whFjzzhFxvEM090HVHyhbtzsNTdHvkkF1mVAnRldc4uLB9kUTBd-Y1IsEXYZUHlK8X2k5AIGNoA1S>



=head3 Namespace Notes

Leo had some suggestions after reading pdd21 (namespaces).  Matt Diephouse and Chip had some thoughts about it too.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/14378b4572b8f5a3/47e7447f6639d248#47e7447f6639d248>



=head3 Managed Pointers .Net Style

Jonathan Worthington was a little unsure of how to implement safe managed pointers for .Net on Parrot.  (Perhaps I will call it P#)  Chip provided useful suggestions for how he might proceed.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/645ed07d9527d353/aa2b5b9b03d01478#aa2b5b9b03d01478>



=head3 Ranges and Iteration

Dave Whipp brought a thread over which discusses different aspects of ranges including comparison, inclusion, and iteration.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/08c115dd8429a994/4b00d8027f170730#4b00d8027f170730>



=head3 Pattern Matching For Loops

Dave Whipp wondered if there was someway to make the for loop in Perl6 do some kind of pattern matching.  Brad Bowman wondered about anonymous multis which sound interesting to me.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/1329560973a3e440/fa0de9c2a4574db7#fa0de9c2a4574db7> -- original post



L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/6806c49eb5912dac/8ec458c1fdc8a1e6#8ec458c1fdc8a1e6> -- more on anonymous multis



=head3 Array Holes

Luke Palmer wondered how array holes would be dealt with in Perl6.  Larry posted his thoughts and musings.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/038de098f8e2b3ce/9fe1501acc0bccec#9fe1501acc0bccec>



=head3 closures capturing sub arguments

Audrey had a question about the semantics of nested subs which capture the argument of the outer sub.  Larry felt that her approach was reasonable and sound.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/722ba3a9e327bae7/e2b90e19a5da10bf#e2b90e19a5da10bf>



=head3 Indeterminate Forms

Audrey wondered how a great number of operations like (0/0 and its ilk) were defined.  Larry felt that boxed types should be consistent and unboxed types fast.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/762d08d1be08c7bb/ef972bf3e356d279#ef972bf3e356d279>



=head3 Split on Empty String

Gaal Yahas noticed that pugs and Perl 5 disagreed on the result of splitting an empty string.  Larry sided with pugs in this case.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/667b49aa6674345f/970f99c0e25069f9#970f99c0e25069f9>



=head3 Short Circuiting Chained Comparisons

Joe Gottman wondered if chained comparisons would short circuit.  Luke Palmer thought that they probably would.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/1b75b0f9c852838d/0893760ae04caa55#0893760ae04caa55>



=head3 Class Methods vs Instance Methods

Rob Kinyon posted his concerns about the ambiguity that was being introduced between class methods and instance methods.  Matt Fowles also voiced concern.  While some thoughts were published, no official word has emeged.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/d6011d3fc7c70273/e363b274846a09ad#e363b274846a09ad>



=head3 Perl 6's Bless

Stevan Little, who has a habit of hurting my brain, posted some concerns he has about C<bless>.  Much discussion ensued.  When it veered of his intended topic, he tried again.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/8ba11b17c0c747b1/e1f82b44b47b6558#e1f82b44b47b6558>



L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/93d9249b3710f816/18dc986fc08a4e47#18dc986fc08a4e47>



=head3 Symbolic References with twigils

Joshua Choi wondered how to create a symbolic reference with a twigil.  Larry posted some thoughts.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/f50f2d826a57983d/9b070a520ccf4634#9b070a520ccf4634>




=head2 The usual footer

To post to any of these mailing lists please subscribe by sending email to <perl6-internals-subscribe@perl.org>, <perl6-language-subscribe@perl.org>,  or <perl6-compiler-subscribe@perl.org>.  If you find these summaries useful or enjoyable, please consider contributing to the Perl Foundation to help support the development of Perl. You might also like to send feedback to ubermatt@gmail.com

L<http://donate.perl-foundation.org/> -- The Perl Foundation
L<http://dev.perl.org/perl6/> -- Perl 6 Development site
L<http://planet.parrotcode.org/> -- Parrot Blog aggregator







