=head1 Perl 6 Summary for 2006-01-24 though 2006-02-07

All~

Welcome to another fortnight's summary.  I would say more, but my throat really hurts.

=head2 Perl 6 Language

=head3 Pugs's Minimum GHC

Darren Duncan proposed moving the minimum GHS requirement from 6.4.0 to 6.4.1.  Based on the conversation, this appears to be a somewhat likely outcome.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.compiler/browse_frm/thread/1261dafa5dcb3017/9cef7037c69ea4bf#9cef7037c69ea4bf>



=head3 Pugs Makefile.PL Update

Beau E. Cox posted a patch to improve Makefile.PL.  Audrey added it and handed him a commit bit.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.compiler/browse_frm/thread/2300a1f4264a8c49/5be069ba89ab6283#5be069ba89ab6283>



=head3 Pugs 3.2.11

Pugs, now officially 1 year old, just hit its 6.2.11 release.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.compiler/browse_frm/thread/e921e85a71df7d39/d4323caba8c8bb8e#d4323caba8c8bb8e>



=head3 Pugs Link Error

Beau E. Cox had trouble linking Pugs 6.2.11 and Parrot 0.4.1.  Audrey pointed out that he needed a parrot source tree nearby.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.compiler/browse_frm/thread/4c3dd552f33c8da5/4478c5014b1f68b1#4478c5014b1f68b1>



=head3 Macros

Larry Wall posted an update of S06.  It looks very tasty.  I hope the standard library has some convenience routines for dealing with Perl 6's AST.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.compiler/browse_frm/thread/a57ab0db3a3d032a/17e162251688d873#17e162251688d873>



=head3 Pugs Version Numbers

Beau E. Cox was a little confused by Pugs's jump in development version.  Kevin Puetz explained the approach to $2 \pi$.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.compiler/browse_frm/thread/373cf6d580efc2ba/233296a692b093b2#233296a692b093b2>



=head3 Parrot Source Tree for Pugs?

Beau E. Cox, after discovering that a Parrot source tree is necessary to build Pugs, wondered if it was still necessary after Pugs was built.  Larry provided the answer: no.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.compiler/browse_frm/thread/ff897f973cdbf39b/4ec0349741d45dfa#4ec0349741d45dfa>



=head3 PGE Binding

Audrey noticed a problem convincing PGE to alias a scalar. Patrick explained that it was not yet implemented.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.compiler/browse_frm/thread/48476c11e427f601/8f8d7449f2d1f78b#8f8d7449f2d1f78b>



=head2 Parrot

Hmmm... If the short one required two cough drops, I fear for the long one.  Of course, that was uncharacteristically large for p6l, so perhaps p6i will be short.  (Gambler's Fallacy, I know)

=head3 Namespace Relativism

Leo noticed a few namespace opcodes which could function either relatively or absolutely.  Peoples seemed to want absolute.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/ef7340ff554e5a91/211dd0ea1f08cd14#211dd0ea1f08cd14>



=head3 Interpreters and Stashes?

Leo posted a few questions about parts of Parrot's guts that he wasn't sure about.  Chip posted his thoughts.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/001ced0384e2cefe/65dd364e82d478e1#65dd364e82d478e1>



=head3 File, OS, and Path

Alberto Simões posted his proposal for File/OS functions.  Chip provided his opinions as well.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/eafe13a470160fde/c806f10d43a72c99#c806f10d43a72c99>



=head3 Object Initialization Issues

Bob Rogers noticed a change in the semantics of object initialization.  He and Leo added tests and nailed down them down more firmly.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/74ec6e6999edc87b/cddcca13a86efba6#cddcca13a86efba6>



=head3 I/O Filters

Steve Gunnell posted his ideas for how to finalize and improve the I/O filter system on which Parrot's IO is built.  Leo, Nicholas Clark, and Joshua Hoblitt fined tuned his ideas slightly.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/ee5dea0c883fff7f/18f0a858accfe5fd#18f0a858accfe5fd>



=head3 Parrot on z/OS

Ravi Sastry wondered if Parrot could run on z/OS.  Jonathan Worthington guessed that it probably would not run right now, but could be made to run by an interested developer.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/aa315a6cbc2bd5b3/4843769ad5332624#4843769ad5332624>



=head3 Dirty I Registers

Jerry Gay noticed that IREGs weren't being zeroed properly.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/fc66ba6fb48a289d/1120025d34794984#1120025d34794984>



=head3 Parrot::Configure::Data::Bug

Norman Nunley found and fixed a bug in Parrot::Configure::Data.  Leo applied the patch.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/a54c10d663a6bb74/bff4e581088207e8#bff4e581088207e8>



=head3 PARROT_IN_EXTENSION

Nicholas Clark noticed some macro strangeness involving PARROT_IN_EXTENSION.  Jonathan Worthington determined that it was vestigial and remove it.  Nicholas was happy.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/cf3e37bb9c034309/700aab0bcde5833e#700aab0bcde5833e>



=head3 Invalid Cleaning Order

Bernhard Schmalhofer noticed that C<make clean> was cleaning itself into a corner.  He filed a bug for it.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/8e84b1a57f738933/2d3334853c2a059a#2d3334853c2a059a>



=head3 FreeBSD JIT Bug

Joshua Isom found a problem with the FreeBSD JIT.  Leo pointed him to some docs to help him debug his problem.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/9a9cb1135ea4af72/6356301d67c82464#6356301d67c82464>



=head3 Makefile Cleanup

Joshua Isom posted a patch cleaning up some makefile stuff.  Joshua Hoblitt thought that further review was necessary.  Warnock applies.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/4d721f86d0c00b3c/f59df8306fe1cd22#f59df8306fe1cd22>



=head3 Supporting Static Variables

Leo posted a few thoughts on how to support static variables in Parrot.  Larry, Nicholas Clark, and Joshua Isom provided a few suggestions.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/dc80372e361e58e8/133dde49c3c40807#133dde49c3c40807>



=head3 Truncating Generated PIR Code

Allison Randal was having problems with generated PIR code getting truncated.  Leo managed to track down and solve the problem.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/e132d97654f0d2f9/ae607d5cca473df9#ae607d5cca473df9>



=head3 Want a Job?

ankit.momaya@oracle.com posted a job offering to the list.  Unfortunately he posted it to google groups (most likely) as it didn't make it to the list proper.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/8df5705e3b75c3f5/06b51a415e2f644a?utoken=mwl_2zcAAADWXQ4sS--whFjzzhFxvEM0QIywsQ7vG4IUE7sitNlpesE_wYKwYX8_bt4wR_UPROaoK5qVmT_Ck8QlMHVwAowQ>



=head3 Exception in a Constructor Oddness

Jonathan Worthington provided a test case display an unexpected interaction between constructors and exceptions.  Warnock applies.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/8b5cdde412a0380e/3aabc4f17d902f4d#3aabc4f17d902f4d>



=head3 Continuation Return Values

Bob Rogers provided a patch allowing Continuations to return values.  Leo applied the patch.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/6ae7424bda10d7ea/734e4b54eae1f650#734e4b54eae1f650>



=head3 Dynamic PMC Link Dependency

Leo noticed that compiling a static parrot leads to problems with dynamic extensions.  Nick Glencross tracked it down to a dependency issue with dynamic pmcs.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/cd44f2463d21b7a5/7efad5f5882914e2#7efad5f5882914e2>



=head3 Restricted clear_eh

Recently Bob Rogers suggested restricting the scope of which exception handlers can be cleared by a clear_eh opcode.  Leo implemented the request and applied Bob's tests.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/fdc7033d01108917/6d536bee46a07b53#6d536bee46a07b53>



=head3 C<*_config.o> Issues

Florian Ragwitz posted a few options on how to clean up the C< *_config.o > issues that seem to come up.  Warnock applies (lightly as he posted on Monday).

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/b3791493520375b8/41f8e06454bd133c#41f8e06454bd133c>



=head3 bc Needs Python

Jerry Gay noticed that languages/bc would fail most of its tests without python.  It should probably probe for that.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/0db92073be64826b/3b5eb0398f1b3b4e#3b5eb0398f1b3b4e>



=head3 GraphViz of Parrot

Allison Randal posted a pdf of the parrot repository generated by GraphViz.  It is pathological enough that acrobat does not really like the file.  I am told that xpdf deals OK.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/fd2d606bb97eba90/9d0892a6f444334f#9d0892a6f444334f>



=head3 Tcl Globals Failure

Will Coleda noticed that r11431 is suddenly failing a few Tcl tests.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/9af8e22011219070/b9667f63ca7e55b0#b9667f63ca7e55b0>



=head3 Param Count Checks

Leo tried enabling param count checks to see what would fail.  The answer appears to be much.  This led to discussion of how to enable and disable checks on both arguments and returns.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/2d84cd6da1134c1a/cb26ae5a3feed6a5#cb26ae5a3feed6a5>



=head3 Method Look up in Dynamic PMCs

François Perrad wondered why his Lua PMCs were failing to find their new methods.  Leo explained that the necessary methodhash in them was not yet implemented and gave him a workaround.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.internals/browse_frm/thread/b38e82f1b0d7af0c/a92b734784f142f7#a92b734784f142f7>



=head2 Perl 6 Language

=head3 "as if"

Jonathan Lang, Stevan Little, and Rob Kinyon has a discussion about some sort of type casting or coercion in Perl 6.  The conversation sorted of petered out undecidedly.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/93d9249b3710f816/fed607409370e24f#fed607409370e24f>



=head3 ff operator

Larry renamed the flip flop operator to C< ff >.  People rejoiced loudly.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/d96fd1dc838c0bc0/617c8040b31ca7fc#617c8040b31ca7fc>



=head3 New T-Shirt

Juerd posted his one line perl 5 to perl 6 conversion T-Shirt to cafe press.  I know at least one summarizer who would not object to having one show up at his door...

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/b7bf0ae20af1bdaa/1d800fba8a31a2d3#1d800fba8a31a2d3>



=head3 Protype Based MMD

Stevan Little posted a link to a nifty paper on Prototype Based MMD. There is also a short version for the attention impaired.  (I read that one; it is neat.)

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/3eb1939261b47a72/af02f4c3bf0a90d7#af02f4c3bf0a90d7>



=head3 S06 Questions

Dakkar had a few questions about S06.  Larry had a few answers.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/ec579aca5f70be75/1d4717d3b18271a8?utoken=CSQFwDYAAACm_q77TyrrVe_fwJ69_5uAIemYKU7YpAzS3f1Kok6rO5GAYPFHhhOphR9nKpUsEVmasOv9YGWOIE68FguCFsWc>



=head3 Named Unicode Characters

larry announced that one could put named Unicode code points into strings like this   "\c[LATIN CAPITAL LETTER A, COMBINING RING ABOVE]".

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/5667941aafe4d925/dab25e71b44ec9d7#dab25e71b44ec9d7>



=head3 Perl 6 can C<goto hell;>

Larry announced the addition of a C<goto> statement.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/cd44430e10c7ee60/98e3e071c6f3da64#98e3e071c6f3da64>



=head3 Something Between State and My

Dave Whipp wondered if he could have a variable that was unique to each non-recursive invocation of a function.  Luke Palmer suggested that env variables already did this, but Larry pointed out a few nuances there.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/eec94db3f2f700f2/a88fc83443aba160#a88fc83443aba160>



=head3 Universal Roles

Yuval Kogman wants a really powerful sort of automatic application of roles, I think.  Warnock applies.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/740ec782117e7da2/f8183cbb4d0f02ea#f8183cbb4d0f02ea>



=head3 Macros

Herbert Snorrason wants more specifics on macros in Perl 6.  Larry gave him some.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/d6e807471cb259fb/de4451149fb349f9#de4451149fb349f9>



=head3 Synopsis Typos

Yiyi Hu and Andrew Savige found a few typos in a few synopses.  Larry graciously fixed them.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/2b4ee0644bb4807a/005b1df13f36c2ec#005b1df13f36c2ec>



=head3 Automatic Instantiation

Darren Duncan wondered if Perl 6 had a way to provide a default value for uninstantiated variables of a particular type.  The led to Larry going into a little more detail on "protype objects", and Matt Fowles pushing for even more detail.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/91c141e0c60647c6/73b7260d09397f9a#73b7260d09397f9a>



=head3 Perl 6 Development Process

Yuval Kogman posted a loose plan for for improving Perl 6's development momentum.  This is a contentious issue, and I will not try to summarize it directly.  Read the link, it is the last one of the summary.

L<http://groups.google.com/group/perl.perl6.language/browse_frm/thread/611b9cc5940bb0c6/ee883572a3d2c5b9#ee883572a3d2c5b9>



=head2 The usual footer

To post to any of these mailing lists please subscribe by sending email to <perl6-internals-subscribe@perl.org>, <perl6-language-subscribe@perl.org>,  or <perl6-compiler-subscribe@perl.org>.  If you find these summaries useful or enjoyable, please consider contributing to the Perl Foundation to help support the development of Perl. You might also like to send feedback to ubermatt@gmail.com

L<http://donate.perl-foundation.org/> -- The Perl Foundation
L<http://dev.perl.org/perl6/> -- Perl 6 Development site
L<http://planet.parrotcode.org/> -- Parrot Blog aggregator
