=head1 This Week on perl5-porters - 1-8 March 2008

"I personally think that the git tools have far too many ways to
do the same thing (a complaint levelled against Perl itself at times)
for the normal human to comprehend, let alone remember." -- John
Peacock, gitting used to the idea of a new code repository.

=head1 Topics of Interest

=head2 ExtUtils::Install updates

Michael G. Schwern released a new version of the venerable
C<ExtUtils::MakeMaker> distribution, partly to include C<ExtUtils::Install>
version 1.45. Unfortunately Yves Orton had, in the meantime, pushed out
version 1.46 which closed out a number of bug reports which had been
quietly gathering dust in the RT queue.

The changes caused a ripple of failures to show up in smoke tests. Yves
had everything squared up again as of version 1.50.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-03/msg00004.html

A side thread on the same issue was started by Jerry D. Hedden
concerning problems with the module on Cygwin. One of the problems
encountered was the broken behaviour of C<Archive::Tar> with
respect to the WinZip archive tool on Windows. Apparently due to
concerns with Solaris interoperability, C<Archive::Tar> will
construct a tar file for which WinZip is unable to discern the
directory structure, thus causing everything to be extracted
into the current directory.

  bit of a hassle, that
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-03/msg00056.html

=head2 Interesting self contained task

In the follow-up to the discussion of getting fresh blood hacking on
the core, Joshua ben Jore pointed to his perlguts talk with a focus
on the op-tree. Eric Wilhelm reminded people of the importance of
the Google Summer of Code with respect to getting new people hacking
on perl.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-03/msg00007.html

This lead to further discussion of the Summer of Code, with cross-pver
from the pm_groups mailing list, about how similar the effort required
is to herding cats.

  don't be eval
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-03/msg00009.html

Eric put out a formal call for an official p5p cat-herder to coordinate
the issues between the SoC and the perl5 porters. I hope he received a
flood of off-list replies.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-03/msg00015.html

=head2 C<List::Util::sum()> doesn't handle overloading

Jan Dubois uncovered a glaring inconsistency between the XS and pure-Perl
implementations of the C<sum> routine: the XS version doesn't deal with
objects that overload C<+> correctly.

Yves Orton recalled previous discussions on the matter and the concensus
was that the XS version was built for speed, which leads to things like
overloading being ignored. Michael G. Schwern thought that he'd rather
settle for slightly slower and always right, rather than slightly
faster and sometimes subtly wrong. Nicholas Clark wanted to know how
much slower an XS version that handles overloading would turn out to
be.

  premature evil
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-03/msg00021.html

=head2 F<ext/Time/Piece/Piece.xs> use of C<strptime>

The FreeBSD copyright statement in C<Time::Piece> went from Matt
Sergeant to blead. A patch from blead to silence a warning on
Windows with the Borland C compiler was sent back in return to
Matt.

  two-way street
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-03/msg00036.html

=head2 C<glob()> implementation

Peter Dintelmann wondered why he kept winding up with csh semantics
for C<glob> rather than bsd semantics, as the documentation suggested.
Adriano Ferreira pointed out that C<csh_glob> is implemented in terms
of C<bsd_glob> anyway.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-03/msg00040.html

=head2 C<PL_destroyhook> race condition

Dave Mitchell had identified a potential race condition where two
threads try to destroy an object and in an "After you", "No, after
you" scenario and the object would be freed but no-one would call
its destructor.

Jerry D. Hedden thought this was an ugly state of affairs, and
after mulling a long time over the code, could not see how to
resolve the issue. He finally began to wonder whether the race
condition could actually be provoked. So he wrote a program to
try and exercise it, but didn't encounter the failure.

Jerry wasn't sure whether this was because there was truly no
was no race condition, or that his program was not subtle enough
to coax it to the surface.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-03/msg00050.html

Jerry also wondered whether this patch could be backported to
the 5.8 track, or whether it broke binary compatibility.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-03/msg00058.html

=head2 POSIX::access(...) returns "0 but true"

Jerry D. Hedden was having trouble with C<POSIX::access> returning
the magic value '0 but true' for both writable and non-writable
directories, so a test was failing when it shouldn't be on Cygwin
and Win32.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-03/msg00053.html

=head2 Perl @ 33218 (continued)

The current maintenance snapshot that will lead to 5.8.9 is currently
stuck on Stratus VOS, since the test suite of C<Module::Pluggable> has
a file that begins with '-' (dash, hyphen, minus...) and this is a no-go
on that platform.

Nicholas Clark couldn't remember what the other issues were.
Consulting previous summaries would lead one to conclude that there
is an unresolved issue concerning C<POSIX::strftime> as well.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-03/msg00071.html

A long back-and-forth between Nicholas and Steve Hay finished up with
a warnings-free build on Win32. The main issue was one of casts causing
warnings.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-03/msg00073.html

In another thread, Jerry D. Hedden coordinated with Nicholas to
quash the remaining 5.8.x build warnings under Cygwin.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-03/msg00090.html

=head2 From Perforce to git

Sam Vilain reported that he had achieved a complete Perforce-to-git
migration, and it was now being updated (albeit with a slight lag)
with changes in real time. He asked for people to have a hard look
to see if they could find any conversion errors.

Nicholas enquired as to whether there would be an easy way to map
a Perforce change number to a git commit (answer: yes, a couple).
He was also wondering how he would be able to cherry pick patches
from blead for application to the various maint tracks.

  git along
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-03/msg00078.html

Shortly afterwards, Rafael announced the switch to git. John
Peacock deeply regretted not having been able to complete the
Perforce to Subversion project, but a new job in Real Life
had eaten all his tuits.

One of the main issues that needs to be sorted out is a simple
"git for perl5 porters" cheat sheet, that supply a minimum list
of commands one needs to know. The other point for early adopters
to remember is that the repository is likely to be torn down
and rebuilt, this time encoded in UTF-8 rather than Latin-1.

(Note to non-native English speakers: the "g" in "git" is pronounced
with a voiced velar plosive (a hard G), like "give" or "get").

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-03/msg00138.html

=head2 More TLC for F<opcode.pl>

Jim Cromie continued to tweak F<opcode.pl> this week, by adding
comments to explain its behaviour and deobfuscating the syntax
a bit. He reasoned that because it is so rarely used by people
outside the inner circle that it needs to be able to stand on
its own two feet a bit better. But the patch got a bit messed up
and he'll probably have to do it again, since no-one actually
applied it.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-03/msg00113.html

=head2 5.10.0 and C<Math::Pari> (and Fedora)

Tom "spot" Callaway wondered if there was a fix for C<Math::Pari>
on 5.10, since it was broken, but it is also a dependency for a
couple of C<Crypt::*> modules. Nicholas Clark wondered what the
authors had to say for themselves, having encountered comments like

  int numargs = ((CV*)cv)->sv_any->xof_off; /* XXXX Nasty of us... */

Nicholas Clark was slightly miffed by the corners cut in the XS
code. The extensive restructuring of the internals that went into
the 5.10 release was theoretically "off limits" to client XS
code, but it turns out that the Pari code was running around
stuffing pointers and ints in all sorts of places that weren't
expected to hold them. This caused a variety of failures that
Nicholas wasn't really inclined to fix.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-03/msg00124.html

In his race against time, Tom also reported that
Data::Structure::Util was also failing its tests on 5.10.0.
Nicholas Clark saw that this (and other) module(s) are
authored by Fotango, and since Fotango no longer officially
exists, they are thus all orphan modules.

Ævar Arnfjörð Bjarmason wondered what else was on
Fedora's list of modules from hell, to which Tom replied that
C<perlbal> (A Perl-based proxy balancer) was also blowing
black smoke, but felt that it was not a show-stopper.

Also problematic was C<Sys::Virt>, C<PDL> and C<Test::AutoBuild>.

Yves Orton suggested Tom run with the slow C<@_> parameter
passing speed-up patch, slated for 5.10.1 (and that Tom should
make sure that it is clear in the output from C<perl -v> that
it is in there, to help with future bug reports from Fedora users).

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-03/msg00146.html

Nicholas Clark did a fine piece of sleuthing work on PDL and
discovered that a random number generator part of the code was not
calling a function like C<drand48>, which led to predictable results.

  Not good if you want unpredictable results
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-03/msg00231.html

He also solved the C<Devel::Profiler> 5.10.0 failure that Tom
uncovered. As for C<B::TerseSize>, Nicholas suggested Tom get
in touch with Philip Gollucci.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-03/msg00195.html

=head2 Perl @ 33444

Nicholas made another snapshot for 5.8.9 and asked what else
was broken apart from the Stratus VOS issues. Craig A. Berry
reported that a smoke test from a patchlevel a few changes earlier
was having problems with threads and ExtUtils. The latter he
suggested could be marked TODO if necessary, mainly because a
certain amount of test failures are for tests that weren't
around in 5.8.8 in the first place.

Jerry D. Hedden listed a number of dual-life CPAN modules that
were out of date with respect to maint. Nicholas gave them a
50/50 chance.

Reini Urban summarised the problems on Cygwin. The work Jan
Dubois made on the compiler switches, to allow gcc to be
binary compatible with VC probably won't make it in until
5.12.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-03/msg00127.html

Problems occurred on Mac OS X 10.5, and the resolution was
made harder by the lack of C<strace>/C<truss> tool to analyse
system calls. I think Nicholas had it all sorted out in the end.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-03/msg00203.html

=head2 File/Glob/t/basic.t intermittently fails test 6

Dominic Dunlop noted that this test would fail from time to
time on darwin 9.2.0 and he couldn't see why. Nor could Nicholas.
Dominic and Steve Peters had suspicions about the C implementation
of C<glob>, as some parts of it remain unchanged since the day
the code was originally checked in.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-03/msg00137.html

=head1 Patches of Interest

=head2 make C<Archive::Extract>'s x.lzma test file be lzma'd, not uupacktool'd

Yitzchak Scott-Thoennes noticed that a data file that was supposed to
be encoded with lzma was in fact encoded with uupack instead. So he
encoded it the right way, and Rafael applied the patch.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-03/msg00082.html

=head2 count-only transliteration needlessly makes copy-on-write scalars normal

Yitzchak also made C<tr> behave cleanly in the face of copy-on-write strings.

  moo
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-03/msg00112.html

=head2 Pushing parent.pm

Yitzchak also thought that now that the issue of the API of C<parent>
has been settled, then C<base> could be marked as discouraged

  not yet deprecated
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-03/msg00128.html

=head1 New and old bugs from RT

=head2 C</^.../m> is slower than logical alternatives (#33051)

Rob Kinyon (dragonchild on Perlmonks) reported a problem where one regexp
was logically equivalent to another... but two orders of magnitude slower.

This was on perl 5.8.4. Steve Peters noted that the difference was lost in
the noise on 5.10, and 5.8.8 did not appear to be affected either.

  not any more
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-03/msg00047.html

=head2 pod2usage(-verbose =E<gt> 0) & pod2usage(-verbose =E<gt> 1) (#39775)

Steve Peters also saw that the patch in this bug report had been applied
to a version of Pod::Parser (version 1.35).

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-03/msg00049.html

=head2 Counting bug in C<Test::Harness> with unexpected early exit (#43267)

Steve Peters thought that this bug could be marked resolved, since
its twin sister on the CPAN RT queue was marked as resolved over
there. Andy Dougherty regretfully informed Steve that the solution
given for resolving it was "upgrade to C<Test::Harness> version 3".

Alas, in the code freeze during the push to 5.10, Test::Harness 3
was considered too raw for inclusion, and the bug in the RT ticket
concerns version 2. Andy, having taken a stab at fixing the bug in
Test::Harness 2.64, suggested that if the problem was sufficiently
annoying to people, then they should upgrade to C<Test::Harness>
3 (which appears to be settling down nicely).

Rafael hinted that C<Test::Harness> 3 will probably be released
during the 5.10 maintenance track. One of the reasons being, as
Michael G.  Schwern points out, it's so much nicer to work with
than screen scraping test output.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-03/msg00051.html

=head2 make C<Devel::Peek::mstat> always available (#46957)

Slaven Rezic had filed a bug report with a patch. Steve took the
patch, applied it, and closed the report. The fix will be of
interest to people who like compiling perl with C<PERL_DEBUGGING_MSTATS>.

Slaven had also noted in the report that compiling with C<PLAIN_MALLOC>
no longer works. This was not addressed (but I imagine it's not serious).

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-03/msg00046.html

=head2 5.9.5 fails make test on AIX 5.3 (#47415)

Continuing his trawl through the 1700+ unresolved bugs in the RT queue,
Steve asked for C<Config> information to help him understand what the
problem was.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-03/msg00054.html

=head2 Use of uninitialized value in die at F</opt/perl/lib/perl5/File/Copy.pm> line 224. (#49660)

Steve Peters tried to close this one as well, but Marc Lehmann
replied that the problem remained, although it was very tricky to
provoke the bug on demand. And the trouble is that the symptom is
the removal of the source file.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-03/msg00026.html

=head2 Not OK: perl 5.11.0 +DEVEL on i686-linux 2.6.22-3-486 (#50080)

No-one begrudged Steve closing this one with some vague waving of hands,
citing that patch or patches unknown had conspired to fix the issue.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-03/msg00027.html

=head2 prototypes sneakily break lvalue subs (#51408)

L. Mai filed the only new bug this week, showing how prototypes interact
with lvalue subs in unexpected ways.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-03/msg00103.html

=head2 Perl5 Bug Summary

  288 new + 1501 open = 1789 (+4 -2)
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-03/msg00043.html
  http://rt.perl.org/rt3/NoAuth/perl5/Overview.html

=head1 In Brief

The Google B<summer of code mentoring> thread was wrapped up this
week, with Eric Wilhelm explaining a mentor for a GSoC project had
to do, and what they received in return (a T-shirt).

  what mentoring meant
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-03/msg00001.html

Jesse Vincent announce the release of the B<rt.cpan.org source code>.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-03/msg00045.html

Back in November 2007, Marcel Grünauer wrote a patch to fix the B<C<NEXT.pm>
bug within overloaded stringification>. This week Nicholas Clark applied it.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-03/msg00052.html

In regards to the B<F<op/sprintf.t> and F<op/write.t> failures>
with mingw-runtime-3.14, Nicholas Clark commented that if Sisyphus
(or anyone) was able to figure out a test probe to identify if the
local environment was running with the buggy library, that they
would be able to work around it during build configuration.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-03/msg00064.html

B<The C<checkpods> program> is going to face the sound of the
chain-saw and/or be subsumed into C<podchecker>.

  cruft culler
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-03/msg00065.html

H.Merijn Brand went B<digging around in C<Devel::PPPort>> and
C<perlguts>  to get C<Text::CVS_XS> to run on everything from 5.005
to 5.10. Tim Bunce thought a C<newSVpv> needed to be wrapped in a
C<sv_2mortal>, but that led to an attempt to free unreferenced
scalar.

  DDTT
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-03/msg00111.html

No, the list is B<not blocking inline patches> in messages.

  at least, not on purpose
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-03/msg00173.html

Jarkko Hietaniemi wondered if he was having an B<attack of the 64-bit perls>.
Three modules of his, quite different internally, were popping up with
test failures on 64-bit systems.

  the 64-bit question
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-03/msg00180.html

=head2 Last week's summary

Juerd Waalboer clarified a couple of points in the Unicode debate,
and asked a couple of questions. Notably whether it was true that
Perl on EBCDIC was broken.

Nicholas Clark replied that it was false to state that it doesn't,
as in actual fact we don't have any information to confirm or refute
the hypothesis that Perl runs on EBCDIC.

  24-29 February 2008
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-03/msg00174.html

=head2 About this summary

This summary was written by David Landgren.

Weekly summaries are published on F<http://use.perl.org/> and posted
on a mailing list, (subscription: F<perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org>).
The archive is at F<http://dev.perl.org/perl5/list-summaries/>.
Corrections and comments are welcome.

If you found this summary useful, please consider contributing to
the Perl Foundation to help support the development of Perl.
