=head1 This Week on perl5-porters - 3-10 February 2008

Ævar Arnfjörð Bjarmason: "It would be a shame if we shipped a perl with
known segfaults."
Nicholas Clark (ever the pragmatist): "It wasn't solved in 5.8.8
so it's not a regression."

=head1 Topics of Interest

=head2 C<pp_const> not that hot?

Nicholas Clark looked at an execution profile, and saw that in a
given workset, C<pp_const> is called around 200 million times, and
in C<if> statement within is taken only 3000 times. Since the
decision to take it or not is known at compile time, it could be
split into two discrete ops which could only be a win.

No takers, but definitely a nice self-contained project for
someone who wants to dip their toe in the p5p waters.

  had I infinite tuits
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00079.html

=head2 New snapshot for 5.8.9 (Perl @ 33218)

Last Saturday (the 2nd of February), Nicholas made 65 commits
in a row to the Perforce repository, thus raising the number of
commits in the repository to 33218.

He then posted a snapshot of what will become Perl 5.8.9, alas,
slightly too late on Saturday afternoon to be included in the
previous summary (which cuts off at around 16:00 UTC).

Apart from various known issues like IRIX and C++ compilers, Nicholas
was very interesting in hearing how it coped on VMS, since he
integrated lots of changes from 5.10 pertaining to VMS, and wasn't
sure if his selection was sufficient.

Jerry D. Hedden pointed out that some of errors on the Cygwin
platform could be solved by backing out a change dealing with
consting.

Andy Armstrong offered to add C<dtrace> support (now that he's
an expert having already done it for 5.10). Nicholas hoped he
could backport it from the 5.10 track, assuming it gets into
what will be 5.10.1.

Craig Berry promised to review the VMS changes. H.Merijn
Brand tweaked his 5.8-dor patch to make sure it could still add
the C<//> defined-or operator to 5.8.

  released before christmas
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00083.html

Jerry asked whether he should try to fix some of the warnings
that were cropping up in recent builds; Nicholas said he hoped
to locate the secret patch that, if applied, would make them
all go away.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00135.html

Jarkko Hietaniemi buzzed Mark Lutz, who works at a large aerospace
firm and has access to some some serious hardware. He reported
success on an SGI but gave up on a Cray X1.

David Cantrell reported compilation success on a Cray YMP, albeit
with a number of test failures.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00206.html

Dave also mentioned that his NetBSD/alpha was perfect barring one
single failure in F<POSIX/t/sigaction.t>.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00176.html

=head2 Data corruption in CPAN shell?

H.Merijn Brand reported problems with the CPAN shell. Andreas
König mentioned that Frank Wiegand had identified the cause
as being a recent version of C<Safe> and that H.Merijn should
downgrade to Safe version 1.12. (Only 5.8.8 is affected, 5.10
is fine).

Rafael thought he had fixed it with change #33236, it being
something to do with version objects being returned from Safe
compartments. John Peacock identified the interaction problem
between C<version.pm> and C<Safe>, and suggested Rafael release
his fix in Safe 1.15 and all would be well.

  playing it safe
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00140.html

=head2 Possible Y2038 solution

Michael G. Schwern mentioned a solution he had heard about
concerning the Y2038 problem, which is bring dates beyond back
to before 2038 and run it through 64-bit safe routines in order
to derive the correct time zone and daylight savings information.

  licence-friendly code
  http://www.2038bug.com/pivotal_gmtime_r.c.html

Jesse Vincent pointed out that this approach will fail whenever
timezones change, the most recent high-visibility exemplar of which
was the USA's daylight savings changes in 2007.

Ben Morrow thought that we could only do so much without shipping
a full timezone database. The conversation continued into
excruciating detail about the periodicity of calendars and how
to deal with daylight savings tweakages.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00143.html

As part of his research, Michael asked for a table of post-2038 times
from a 64 bit system. Mark Mielke provided him with enough data to
keep him going 700 years.

  my 600th birthday is on a Saturday
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00239.html

=head2 64 bit C<localtime_r()> on 32 bit C<time_t> machines

Michael then delivered some experimental code to provide 64-bit time
routines suitable for 32-bit hardware. Jan Dubois wondered
about the licensing issues (since Michael had used code from
2038bug.com).

Andy Dougherty explained how to make the code more platform
agnostic. Michael explained that the code needs quite a bit
of work still and pointed out the areas where he was not happy.
Andy thought that much of the problems could be addressed
with Configure probes, and promised to get a round tuit.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00259.html

=head2 perl compiler, continued

David Nicol wondered if Reini Urban's compiler work would allow, for
example, a known IV passed to a function to be passed as a bare C<int>,
thereby removing a certain amount of indirection required to get from 
the pointer to an C<SV> down to the raw C<int>.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00139.html

=head2 F<op/sprintf.t> and F<op/write.t> failures with C<mingw-runtime-3.14>

Rob Sisyphus reported that the changes made to the MinGW runtime
in order to have a C99-compliant C<libmingwex>, and said he'd file
a bug with them.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00102.html

=head2 Slowdown in 5.10.0 regexes with atomic patterns

Dave Mitchell admitted to having chopped some code out of the regexp
engine that dealt with the super-linear positive cache (no, I don't
know what it does) on the grounds that he couldn't figure out how
it could be triggered, nor did anything in the test suite tickle
it. And it got in the way of making the regexp engine non-recursive.

Moritz Lenz replied that fixing it up was probably not that important
since the test case was rather pathological, insofar that if someone
were to write such a pattern and encounter the slowdown, it would
be easy to reformulate it to avoid the problem.

  not really a bug
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00182.html

=head2 OpenVMS largefile C<getpos>/C<setpos>

Hein van den Heuvel was wondering why Perl couldn't deal with large
files (E<gt>2GiB) out of the box, since the information returned
by C<getpos> (a.k.a. C<tell>) is an opaque cookie that is passed
to C<setpos> (a.k.a. C<seek>) as required. Therefore perl should
just use that, and get large file handling for free.

Craig Berry thought that the interface was cracked open and exposed
to be compatible with C<seek> and C<tell>. If people didn't really
that, he proposed a two-line fix that restore the native VMS
file positioning behaviour.

  peeking behind the curtain
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00251.html

=head1 Patches of Interest

=head2 C<win32_async_check()> didn't loop enough

In the beginning, C<win32_async_check()> could interact poorly with
C<win32_msgwait>, and the denizens of the Win32::GUI mailing list
determined that it could go into an infinite loop and consume all
available CPU. It was subsequently patched to prevent this occurring,
but the balance swung the other way, and caused 30 second DDE
timeouts because it didn't loop enough. Robert May provided a patch
to find the middle ground, and this Rafael applied.

  the goldilocks syndrome
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00098.html

=head2 Give Win32 message windows proper window procedures

Robert May then provided a second patch to improve the C<alarm> and
C<kill> implementations on Win32. Rafael applied the patch to blead,
and if everything checks out correctly, it may be backportable
it to 5.10.

  wake up, time to die
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00105.html

=head2 F<sv.c> consting

Steven Schubiger added some consting goodness to F<sv.c>, which
Rafael applied. So he did it again, and Rafael applied that too.
And then again, and still Rafael followed. But then Steven
delivered a fourth patch of consting goodness, but it didn't 
get applied.

  repeat as necessary
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00116.html

=head2 Extend t/test.pl:runperl routine to set subprocess ENV

Jim Cromie was looking at the XML output from a MAD run, and needed
to be able to specify an environment variable beforehand, and so
set about adding a general mechanism to F<test.pl>.

Nicholas cautioned about the dangers of being insufficiently
shell-agnostic, and suggested a hash key/value approach to let
each platform implement the initialisation of the environment.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00188.html

=head2 Feature bundles are the same across all subversions

Rafael applied Steffen Müller's patch that ensures that any
specific feature request (such as C<use feature 5.10.3>) gets
the same set of features as C<use feature 5.10>.

The result is a little drastic but there doesn't seem a way around
the possible inconsistencies that may arise. So, for now, the
porters promise that no new features will be added in 5.10 (that
would require an extension to the C<feature> pragma, other
new, non-C<feature> features are fair game).

  the features remain the same
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00281.html

=head2 C<mg_magical()> sometimes turns C<SvRMAGICAL> on when it shouldn't

Vincent Pit returned to his magical patch with some test cases that
demonstrated the problem.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00299.html

=head2 Unwanted warnings from C<PerlIO::scalar>

Hugo van der Sanden explained that his caution regarding the correct
use of magic in Ben Morrow's patch for C<PerlIO::scalar> was not
meant to kill the patch dead. Ben Morrow responded with what he
thought was a change that resolved the issue, although he wished
there was a F<perlmagic.pod> that would explain the finer points
of magic.

Rafael thought that the patch looked good enough to take.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00301.html

=head2 Optimize C<OP_IS_(FILETEST|SOCKET)> macros

Jim Cromie reworked F<opcode.pl> to generate more efficient
macros written to F<opcode.h>, by relying on the property of
consecutive opcode numbers. Nicholas was very impressed, as
this shaved 300 bytes off the size of F<util.o>.

Jim followed up with another tweak that resulted in a dozen
or so bytes being saved.

  cache dispenser
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00312.html

=head1 Watching the smoke signals

The most recent 5.8.9-to-be smoke failure on Windows, courtesy of Steve Hay.

  Smoke [5.8.8] 33205 FAIL(F) MSWin32 WinXP/.Net SP2 (x86/2 cpu)
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00078.html

And a series of blead failures, also from Steve, the most recent of which is

  Smoke [5.11.0] 33261 FAIL(F) MSWin32 WinXP/.Net SP2 (x86/2 cpu)
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00305.html

=head1 New and old bugs from RT

=head2 Hints for IRIX (#33849)

Andy Dougherty wrapped up the compiler issues on IRIX with a patch, that
Rafael applied. Now to see if it works.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00269.html

=head2 Residual threads crash (#45053)

Jerry D. Hedden reported that change #31864, designed to resolve bug #45053
made a valiant attempt at perfection, but if you run the test script
repeated, it will emit periodically the message "Bad free() ignored (PERL_CORE) during global destruction."

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00115.html

=head2 C<IO::Handle> method C<say> should ignore C<$\> (#49266)

  "Fixed in bleadperl by change #33258" -- Rafael
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00303.html

=head2 C<Scalar::Util> - documentation problem (#49434)

Steve Peters excised the reference to a book mentioned in the documentation
that will never see the light of day.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00133.html

=head2 Attributes + Unknown Error (#49472)

Andreas König's binary search revealed that the bug (bad diagnostics)
was introduced with change #31255. Nicholas helpfully reposted the
entire patch to the list. Dave Mitchell took one look at it and posted
change #33265 three hours later to fix it.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00306.html

=head2 Segfault on C<perl -e 'split //, unpack "(B)*", "ab"'> (#50256)

Nicholas got to the bottom of the issue: C<split> imposes scalar
context on C<unpack>, and parens in unpack templates had, um shall
we say, undefined behaviour in scalar context.

  behavioural modification
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00184.html

=head2 F<perlop.pod> - misnomer in % operator documentation (#50364)

Martin Becker's documentation tweak regarding modulus and common
residues was accepted.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00290.html

=head2 C<Filter::Util::Call> problem with C<$_> (#50430)

Steve Hay twiddled the filter code to make the problem go away and
also didn't break anything else in the tests, but was hoping someone more
skilled in the art of filters would care to comment.

  say we just called them a failed experiment?
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00203.html

=head2 C<keys %+> does not return the correct keys (#50496)

Jonas Kramer reported a bug with two issues, one of which was due
to POD formatting issues on his terminal that causes C<%-> to be
rendered as C<%?>. Don't laugh, people lose satellites for less
than this.

The other issue was confirmed to be a true bug by Abigail, who went
on to write some TODO tests for F<t/op/pat.t> lest they be forgotten.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00119.html

=head2 Perl 5.10.0 segfaults on C<format> with C<my> variables (#50528)

Stephan Springl delivered a delightfully concise test program
to show how to make 5.10.0 coredump. It turns out that this is
actually a marginal improvement over 5.8, since the same
program will run the code without crashing, but will give the
wrong results.

Dave Mitchell figured out what the problem and suggested two lines
of enquiry to explore. Unfortunately he was waiting for a new
delivery of tuits and was thus unable to do anything more.

  beware the abominable newATTRSUB
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00154.html

=head2 Compiling the latest 5.8 snapshot on QNX (#50530)

Matt Kraai reported difficulty getting Perl 5.8 up and running
on QNX. C<getcwd> seemed to be giving grief, as do possibly
unsigned C<time_t> data types.

Nicholas made some suggestions which cleared up some, but
not all, errors.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00157.html

=head2 C<when( @n && %n )> fails to smart match (#50538)

brian d foy filed a bug report following his request for comments
on the behaviour of C<&&> in a C<when> clause. His argument was
that the documentation does not coincide with the implementation,
but didn't know which one needed to be fixed.

  could be a feature
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00161.html

=head2 Storable does not store C<REGEXP> items (#50608)

"sand" (who I suspect is really Andreas Köenig's sandbox)
filed a reminder bug to point out that C<Storable> needs to
be updated to handle the new C<REGEXP> datatype in 5.11.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00252.html

=head2 CPAN shell bug on AIX 5.3 (#50612)

Joachim Görner built a 5.8.8 on AIX. When he tried to run a CPAN
shell, it appeared to have trouble downloading the CPAN indices,
trying to rename a file that doesn't exist.

He pointed out that 5.8.2 works correctly on the same machine.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00253.html

=head2 Perl5 Bug Summary

289 new + 1494 open = 1783 (10 created, 39 closed)

  ooh, someone's been busy
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00131.html
  http://rt.perl.org/rt3/NoAuth/perl5/Overview.html

=head1 This is the BBC

=over 4

=item Devel-StackTrace 1.15

Dave Rolsky announced a fix in the shape of 1.16, available on CPAN.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00114.html

=back

=head1 New Core Modules

=over 4

=item B::Generate 1.12_04

Jim Cromie made a new release that works on both 5.10 and 5.8.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00261.html

=item ExtUtils::MakeMaker 6.43_01

Michael G. Schwern released a development version of the venerable
ExtUtils::MakeMaker module. Rafael and Steve Peters brought blead
up to date with the latest goodies.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00286.html

=back

=head1 In Brief

Moritz Lenz figured out that the weird C<__stack_ck_chk_fail_local>
errors was caused by B<compiling with C<-fstack-protector>>. Take
it out and everything is fine. Andy Dougherty said he'd look at
providing a better test for C<Configure>.

  back to the drawing board
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00120.html

Jarkko Hietaniemi revived an two year old message from the depths
of his outbox regarding the possibility of intercepting a possible
B<segmentation fault with C<unpack 'P'>>.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00149.html

H.Merijn Brand reported that B<gcc-4.2.3, HP-UX 11.23 and blead> is
not a recipe for happiness.

  back to 3.4.6
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00160.html

Jerry D. Hedden asked for, and received, B<co-maintenance of
C<Thread::Queue>>. It's now dual-lifed, and so we may expect
exciting new features on CPAN.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00170.html

Yamashina Hio had some more questions about POD's LE<lt>E<gt> codes
but received no answers.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00194.html

Vincent Pit saw that B<C<mg_copy> ought to take an C<I32>> instead of
an C<int>, and so it was done.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00197.html

Alas, Jerry D. Hedden pointed out that this unfortunately causes
"initialization from incompatible pointer type" warnings in
C<threads::shared>. He wondered if there were 32/64-bit issues at
hand, and if so, what was the best way to resolve them.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00291.html

Jim Cromie added some simple tests to B<validate C<-Dx> output> saying
that it wasn't the most important thing in the world, but it might
be helpful to know if and when the output changes in subtle ways.

  canary in a perl mine
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00232.html

Jim Cromie thought Nicholas's F<expand-macros.pl> trick was so useful,
he gave it the ability to B<pretty-print the macro expansions>.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00276.html

Jerry D. Hedden wrote a patch that added a lot of B<tests for read-only
variables>.

  unapplied
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00295.html

José Auguste-Etienne posted a patch to F<hints/aix_4.sh> to allow
B<builds on AIX 4.2> to succeed. Applied.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00300.html

Slaven Rezic is the current B<Tk maintainer>.

  security patches welcome
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00307.html

=head2 About this summary

  last week's news
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00270.html

This summary was written by David Landgren.

Weekly summaries are published on F<http://use.perl.org/> and posted
on a mailing list, (subscription: F<perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org>).
The archive is at F<http://dev.perl.org/perl5/list-summaries/>.
Corrections and comments are welcome.

If you found this summary useful, please consider contributing to
the Perl Foundation to help support the development of Perl.
