=head1 This Week on perl5-porters - 24-29 February 2008

"Is this a bug? Or why is this the expected behaviour?"
-- Steffen Ullrich, playing with signal handlers.

=head1 Topics of Interest

=head2 C<use encoding 'utf8'> bug for Latin-1 range

The thread about C<use encoding> continued this week. Juerd Waalboer
gave one of the best concise explanations as to why the current model
Perl uses for dealing with Unicode is broken, which is that the C<\x>
hex escape is overloaded for bytes (C<\x2b> I<versus> C<\x{d0b2}>),
and that it takes place too early, while the source is being read.

The result of which is that a source code file encoded in an
Asian language cannot embed a latin-1 character like an e-acute.

Much discussion of remarkable civility followed, regarding what
to do about the matter. Glenn Lindemann put forward the following
ideas:

=over 4

=item *

Deprecate C<use encoding>.

=item *

Deprecate non-ASCII characters in 5.12 source code, unless a
source encoding has been specified.

=item *

Allow Unicode semantics to be applied to all character operations
on strings (case conversion, caseless comparisons and so on),
regardless of their internal representations.

=item *

Sort out the timing of when C<\x>, C<\x{}> and C<\N> take effect.

=back

No-one appeared to lament the idea of letting C<encoding> go.

Yves Orton pointed out that Microsoft managed to get their Unicode
handling more or less right, albeit at a certain cost to their API,
and regretted that Unix-like operating systems supplied the absolute
strict minimum, pushing all the work onto each and every client
program. Which meant that nothing really worked at all, not even
the so-called shebang line.

Juerd and Nicholas put forward that there is a case to be made for
perl to figure out itself whether a given source file is in ASCII,
Latin-1 or UTF-8. It turns out that it's just about impossible to
construct a sensible Latin-1 file that also turns out to be be valid
UTF-8. The idea is to start out in 7-bit ASCII and carry on until a
byte with the high bit set is encountered.

If this byte introduces a valid UTF-8 character, the rest of the
file must be, too.  Any invalid byte sequences thereafter trigger
a fatal compile-time error. Otherwise it means it must be Latin-1,
in which case similar but different rules apply which also cause
the compilation to halt if encodings change mid-stream. The key
issue is to determine that the encoding does indeed change.

EBCDIC was also mentioned in passing. Sadly, Perl no longer runs
on EBCDIC due to a general lack of nurturing. Then again, if it was
important, Nicholas felt that someone from IBM would have been in
touch at some point.

  for some reason I now have a splitting headache
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00765.html

=head2 Interrupting C<system()> with signal depends on signal handler

Steffen Ullrich noticed that an C<alarm> signal handler that does
a C<syswrite> as opposed to a C<print> behave differently. After
diving in through F<pp_sys.c>, he noticed that he could make the
C<print> version (which was working correctly) behave the same
incorrect way, by setting C<$!> to undef.

He produced a one-line patch that fixed the behaviour (hmm, did we
get a test?) and Rafael applied it as change #33408.

  handle with care
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00751.html

=head2 CPAN NetBIOS broadcasts

Linda W was scratching her head wondering why CPAN installations on
cygwin were glacially slow. After running a network trace, she
discovered that what had been a path F</var/cache/cpan> was being
interpreted as a UNC path (/cache/cpan on host //var).

This caused the local host to send out plaintive calls for host //var
to please call home. Michael G. Schwern thought that this sounded
like the same problem described in CPAN bug #32813, as did Linda.

Yves Orton, current maintainer of C<ExtUtils::Install>, which is were
the problem originated, pushed out a new version and Linda confirmed
that it solved the problem.

Ken Williams was not around to comment on how hard it is to use
File::Spec correctly.

  not quite Unix, not quite Windows
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00771.html

=head2 Google summer of code

Eric Wilhelm got the ball rolling on Perl's participation in Google's
Summer of Code project. But you've probably heard about this in other
venues. All hail Eric.

The Perl 5 Wiki is place to go for the latest information.

  summertime fun
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00830.html
  http://www.perlfoundation.org/perl5/index.cgi?gsoc2008_projects

=head1 Patches of Interest

=head2 F<sv.c> consting goodness

Steven Schubiger's consting patch number 4 from the beginning of the month
was applied. This lead to patches 5, 6, 7, 8 and 9, all applying ever
more consting to F<sv.c> being issued by Steven, which in turn were all
applied by various porters.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00832.html

=head2 no archlib in otherlibdirs

After some long, hard thought, Andy Dougherty remembered why Reini
Urban's plan for organising site and vendor libraries on Cygwin
wouldn't work in the general case. So Reini withdrew his patch but
would continue to use it locally.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00737.html

On the other hand, his enhancements to C<B::Debug> made it in.

  win some, lose some
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00732.html

=head2 warning message for -M:Foo, extended and revised

Robin Barker finally settled on "Invalid module name :Foo with -M
option: contains single ':'", which was good enough for Rafael

  colonphun
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00806.html

=head2 More diagnostics for F<Fatal.pm>

Slaven Rezic enhanced C<Fatal> to name the builtin that could not be
overridden in its dying message.

  if I told you I would have to kill you
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00828.html

=head1 Thread patches

Jerry D. Hedden is doing so much work on threads at the moment, he
deserves his own section.

First off, the patch to not install threads on non-thread builds was
reverted (Michael G. Schwern killer argument being that at least that
way you get a nice error message).

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00721.html

Then the CPAN 1.69 version of C<threads> was synch'ed with blead.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00727.html

As was C<threads::shared> 1.17.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00728.html

At the end of the week, he also delivered version 1.18, which added
some diagnostics to help track down what's going wrong when
F<t/stress.t> decides to go belly up.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00761.html

Moving along, C<Thread::Semaphore> 2.07 checked in.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00729.html

and last but not least, C<Thread::Queue> 2.06 did too.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00730.html

=head1 Watching the smoke signals

It looked like F<t/stress.t> in the threads module failed, and so
Jerry asked if there was any chance of seeing what the new diagnostics
had to say. Steve Hay discovered that the problem was in fact a TODO
test that had started to pass, and Test::Smoke got confused and
recorded it as a failure.

  Smoke [5.11.0] 33390 FAIL(F) MSWin32 WinXP/.Net SP2 (x86/2 cpu)
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00808.html

=head1 New and old bugs from RT

=head2 Segfault when calling C<-E<gt>next::method> on non-existing package (#51092)

David Landgren thought that the test that Rafael Garcia-Suarez added as
part of the fix for this bug should have had the RT bug number embedded
in it somewhere. In other other news, we discovered that there are 485
subscribers to perl5-porters.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00731.html

=head2 Perl5 Bug Summary

  288 new + 1500 open = 1788 (+3 -2)
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00741.html
  http://rt.perl.org/rt3/NoAuth/perl5/Overview.html

=head1 New Core Modules

=over 4

=item ExtUtils::Install version 1.45

This was the fix for the C<//var> problem noted by Linda W. (But stay
tuned next week for exciting new developments).

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00798.html

=item  ExtUtils::MakeMaker 6.44

Michael G. Schwern rolled out 6.34_01 plus Yves's EU::I 1.45 as
version 6.44. Other assorted bugfixes made it in, but Michael
announced that he had declined to put in the fixes required to
make paths with whitespace work correctly, saying that he wanted
to think about a better solution.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00824.html

=back

=head1 In Brief

Last week, Jim Cromie had the newfound ability to hook XML analysis
to a test suite (via the C<PERL_XMLDUMP> environment variable). This
week, Jim wrote a B<patch to test -Dmad's PERL_XMLDUMP= output>. It
was not applied.

  truly madly
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00720.html

On the other hand, Rafael did apply his B<optimisation of the
C<OP_IS_(FILETEST|SOCKET)> macros>, with some C<OP *>/C<int> fuzz.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00733.html

The exact recipe for signalling a non-met prerequisite (such that a perl
build without threads should B<not attempt to require threads>) was nailed
down and codified on the CPAN Testers wiki.

  http://cpantest.grango.org/
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00759.html

Salvador Fandiño found that the documentation made no mention of
B<C<av_delete> calling C<sv_2mortal> on the returned C<SV>>. Yet
C<av_pop> and C<av_shift> don't and so the documentation should probably
point out the difference.

  quirk quirk
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00722.html

Craig Berry reported that maint-5.8 was not compiling on VMS, largely due to
B<incorrect prototypes in F<re.xs>>. Nicholas Clark determined that
a subsequent integration fixed the problem.

  a matter of time
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00723.html

Steve Peters wanted to know why B<quad words on Win32> weren't configured,
since all the pieces were in place to allow them to be. Jan Dubois thought
that it wasn't much of a problem since you really need to have C<IVSIZE>
defined to be 8 to take any advantage of them.

  mmm, bignums
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00743.html

Nicholas Clark hacked C<perlbug> to allow it to B<send thank-you messages>
back to the porters.

  send more money
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00747.html

Nicholas also got his languages mixed up trying to B<write else if in
C macros>. Fortunately there are only four or five distinct syntaxes
to master for writing else if constructs in all computer languages.

  as if
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00776.html

=head2 About this summary

This summary was written by David Landgren. I chopped a day off this week;
it makes it easy to start next week on the first of the month.

  17-23 February 2008
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2008-02/msg00822.html

Weekly summaries are published on F<http://use.perl.org/> and posted
on a mailing list, (subscription: F<perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org>).
The archive is at F<http://dev.perl.org/perl5/list-summaries/>.
Corrections and comments are welcome.

If you found this summary useful, please consider contributing to
the Perl Foundation to help support the development of Perl.
