=head1 This Week on perl5-porters - 28 November-4 December 2005

A rather hectic week on p5p, when it was revealed that
signed/unsigned comparisons and unchecked format strings to
C<printf> and C<sprintf> could cause serious problems in
poorly written applications.

=head2 Format strings in C<s?printf>

It turned out that a nasty C<sprintf> format string could cause havoc
in the C<webmin> application suite (a set of web scripts geared
towards systems administration). Not the kind of place you want
havoc to occur.

Rafael noted that this could lead to a buffer overrun in the
interpreter, by taking advantage of a signed/unsigned conversion
bug in C<printf> (which is pretty much all hand-rolled and not the
C<printf> of the underlying C standard library), and that the next
major release will apply taint checks to format strings. Andy
questioned whether it was really possible to create a buffer overrun,
and Gisle Aas responded with a tiny one-liner:

  $ perl -e 'printf "%4294967295d"'
  Segmentation fault (core dumped)

In a subsequent thread, Andy was rather dismayed to learn that
pretty-printing a variable through a C<%d> format string makes it
lose its taintedness. In later developments, Jan Dubois pointed out
that Python does not have this flaw:

  >>> print "%4294967295d" % 1
  Traceback (most recent call last):
    File "<stdin>", line 1, in ?
  ValueError: width too big

Andy subsequently decided not to post a rebuttal to the News.com
article, since, to paraphrase Nathan Torkington: "everybody fucked
up", and the best that can be done is to get the fix into 5.8.8,
and get 5.8.8 out the door. Nicholas Clark replied that it would
take a couple of weeks, which would take us right up to Christmas
time. Not the kind of time you want a Perl upgrade to occur.

Philippe M. Chiasson cooked up a patch that produced the following
behaviour:

  $ perl -e 'printf("%04294967294d",1)'
  panic: memory wrap at -e line 1.

That patch was applied by Rafael, but Gisle still managed to punch
a hole through it with C<sprintf "%#.4294967295b">. But made up
for it by fixing it. Dave Mitchell supplied a patch to fix the
signed/unsigned mismatch in the C<printf> code. Hugo van der Sanden
had a minor quibble with the change in behaviour, and Nicholas
provided a clearer change.

Gisle thought about patching the code and documentation for
C<Sys::Syslog>, to prevent the possibility of using C<%n>.
Ronald Kimball improved the patch with a better regular
expression to strip out C<%n>.

(Summariser's note: C<%n>, in case you weren't aware (I had to go
and look it up in the documentation), takes the current number
of characters emitted so far by the format string, and stores
that count in the next variable appearing in the argument list;
problems occur when there is no variable to take the result).

Gisle then came back later with a patch for C<sprintf>, to
prevent constant folding from taking place. Hugo appreciated the
patch, and suggested a long-term plan. (Constant folding in this
context meaning something like):

  perl -MO=Deparse -e '$a = sprintf "%g", 2/3'
  $a = '0.666667';

Which stops bad things happening when C<%g> is replaced by C<%99g>
(where 99 is a very large number). But in general, constant folding
is a Good Thing, and a concensus seems to be forming around the
idea that it should be possible to back out of a constant folding
attempt during compilation without killing the compile, and defer
the resolution until run-time.

Andy started to look at GCC's warnings of signed/unsigned comparisons,
and picked a bit of low-hanging fruit in F<pp_pack.c>. He also heard
back from Jack Louis, who reported the the initial integer
overflow problem. Dave Mitchell noted that one of them had already
been fixed in C<blead>. Andy forwarded another message from Jack
showing how the exploit could be brought to bear on Webmin.

Joshua ben Jore pointed to a couple of threads he wrote on Perlmonks,
showing the results of the code he wrote to look for uses of C<printf>
and C<sprintf> with non-constant format parameters.

Executive summary: the problems will be fixed in 5.8.8, and a series
of patches will be made available for all the 5.8 releases.

  The article on News.com
  http://news.com.com/2100-1002_3-5975954.html

  Andy Lester's call for input
  http://xrl.us/i395

  sprintf and tainting
  http://xrl.us/i396

  Andy's first approximation to a PR response
  http://xrl.us/i397

  Andy declines to respond
  http://xrl.us/i398

  Philippe's patch
  http://xrl.us/i399

  Dave's patch
  http://xrl.us/i4aa

  Gisle's patch
  http://xrl.us/i4ab

  Disabling constant folding of sprintf
  http://xrl.us/i4ac

  Andy's patch of pp_pack.c
  http://xrl.us/i4ad

  Word back from the original finder of the integer overflow
  http://xrl.us/i4ae

  Details of a possible exploit
  http://xrl.us/i4af

  The message sent to bugtraq
  http://xrl.us/i4ag

  Joshua's findings
  http://xrl.us/i4ah

=head2 Debugging F<lib/archive/tar.t/02_methods.t>

John E. Malmberg was having difficulty tracking down why this test
file was failing on VMS, and had to resort to inserting C<print>
statements to trace what was happening. Rafael Garcia-Suarez explained
that it was hard to find, because in fact it is created in
F<00_setup.t>. Ronald J Kimball thought it rather dubious that two
different test files cannot be run independently of each other (this
precludes, amongst other things, being able to run tests in a
massively parallel manner).

  Looking in the wrong place
  http://xrl.us/i4ai

=head2 C<my $var = undef> fails to set C<$var> when re-run

Erland Sommarskog posted bug #37776 showing that a declaration and
assignment of a variable to C<undef> doesn't work when the assignment
is run subsequently. It turns out that it was due to an optimisation
that was, well, wrong. This behaviour, according to Robin Houston, is
a side-effect of change #22520. Rafael fixed it with change #26226.

  Can't go there again
  http://xrl.us/i4aj

=head2 F<Cwd.pm> scan of C<$ENV{PATH}>

Nick Ing-Simmons ran into a problem with C<Cwd>'s use of C<grep>
on the list of directories in C<$ENV{PATH}>. This usually works
well, but if your PATH happens to contain automounted directories
that are not there, bad things happen. Indeed, Nick's C<Cwd> was
taking I<minutes> to load. This can be construed as an abuse of
C<grep>, because only the first result is needed, but C<grep>, by
design, will always scan the entire list it is given. Nick
proposed a number of ways out of the problem.

Graham Barr suggested C<first> from C<List::Util>. Ken Williams
said that C<Cwd> contains lots of ancient voodoo, and because it
is so low on the CPAN dependency graphs, that a C<foreach> is
probably the only wise path to take. Some patches were put forward.

  http://xrl.us/i4ak

=head2 Using C<I32> for arrays on 64 platforms

Jan Dubois noticed that the internal structures for arrays use
32 bits for index computations, thus limiting arrays on 64 bit
architectures to I<only> 2**32 elements. An array that size
would consume a non-trivial amount of memory, but Jan felt that
it should be fixed in blead, even if it wouldn't start being
hit by applications for some time yet. Or otherwise, paraphrasing
Bill Gates, that "2**32 array elements will be big enough for
everyone." The concensus seems to be to use an C<IV> instead.

  http://xrl.us/i4am

=head2 Passing function parameters in registers

Last week in his quest to const, Andy Lester stumbled across
some redundant code that he was able to chop out. In response
Yitzchak Scott-Thoennes asked whether Andy was considering
investigating the C<regparm> attribute of the gcc compiler,
which indicates that the parameters of the function are to
be passed in registers, for a nice speed boost. But
implementing this would add considerable complexity to the
codebase.

  The regparm attribute
  http://xrl.us/i4an

  Declaring attributes in gcc
  http://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gcc-4.0.2/gcc/Function-Attributes.html

=head2 POD Encoding

Alberto Simões was writing POD assuming Latin-1, but noted that
it gets mangled on a system that uses UTF-8 by default, and wondered
what the correct fix was. Russ Allbery replied that the correct
solution was to use the C<=encoding> directive. POD translators that
are based on C<Pod::Simple> get this for free. Other translators
including C<pod2man> and C<pod2txt> may not.

Worse, C<pod2man> has difficulty in dealing with non-ASCII characters
because of limitations in C<nroff> implementations. Russ is hoping to
get around to adding a switch to C<pod2man> to tell it to "assume
C<groff>", which does not how to generate UTF-8 output.

Tels noted that the POD in C<blead> does not contain any C<=encoding>
directives, and that it probably should. Then Sadahiro Tomoyuki
started talking about EBCDIC and my head exploded.

  http://xrl.us/i4ao

=head2 The Archive of Perl Changes (APC)

Philippe M. Chiasson wrote to say that the Archive of Perl Changes is
now running on more powerful hardware (a shade less than ten times more
powerful, if you lend any credence to BogoMIPS).

The main change is that L<rsync://ftp.linux.activestate.com/> became
L<rsync://public.activestate.com/>. Abe Timmerman experienced
a bit of transient grief with his C<Test::Smoke> kit, but everything was
sorted out in the end.

  http://xrl.us/i4ap

=head2 New Modules

John Peacock released B<C<version-0.50>>. Much of the change involves
improvements to the documentation.

  http://xrl.us/i4aq

Andreas König released B<C<CPAN-1.80>>. Lots of new goodies, including
support for C<sudo> and new commands C<recent> and C<perldoc>. Now runs
(again) under 5.005_04.

  http://xrl.us/i4ar

=head2 Perl5 Bug Summary

1512 as of Monday the 5th. All the tickets that were opened last
week were commented on, which made Robert Spier happy.

  http://xrl.us/i4as

=head2 In Brief

B<C<podlators> 2.00 released> by Russ Allbery. The underlying POD
parsing is now handled by C<Pod::Simple>, rather than C<Pod::Parser>.
Stever Peters planned to add it the core. Tels was very happy, and
showed how this would let him write custom POD paragraphs.

  http://xrl.us/i4at

Ulrich Windl filed bug report #37781 show B<how to make the debugger
crash>. Richard Foley replied with a couple of message IDs showing
what the probable fix would be, and otherwise how to work around it.

  http://xrl.us/i4au

Torsten Förtsch queried a B<strange split feature>, wondering why
the trailing empty elements of the C<split> are discarded. H.Merijn
Brand explained that it was operating according to spec, and showed
a snippet that let Torsten achieve the desired result.

  http://xrl.us/i4av

B<Redundant C<SvUTF8_on()> calls> were removed from the codebase
in a couple of places, thanks to careful observation from Gisle.

  http://xrl.us/i4aw

B<Tk compatibility> was reported broken on C<blead> by Gisle on the
23rd of November. Andreas König traced the fault back to change
#26110. The fix had already been unwound in C<maint>, and Rafael
unwound it in C<blead>. But the bug that the change tried to fix
in the first place, as Nicholas reminded us, is still there.

  http://xrl.us/i4ax

B<C<arenas by SV-type>> work continued. Jim Cromie smoked the latest
C<blead> and more or less came up with a clean bill of health. There
were a couple of compiler squawks, and one test failure that Jim had
difficulty in deciding whether it was because C<blead> was in a
state of flux, or whether it was because of his patch since
"monkeying with arenas affects everything."

  http://xrl.us/i4ay

and a patch to unify C<PL_body_arenaroots[]> to a single variable:

  http://xrl.us/i4az

Sadahiro Tomoyuki improved his B<XS-assisted SWASHGET> patch.

  http://xrl.us/i4a2

=head2 About this summary

This summary was written by David Landgren. Adriano and I are
moving to a Monday night publishing schedule, rather than
Sunday night, to give us a bit more time.

One thing I keep failing to mention in these summaries is the 
tireless effort that Steve Peters puts into delving into the
bug queue and closing out fixed bugs and reviving the lost, the
forgotten and the ignored. The number of open bugs for
Perl5 has been pretty stable over the last few months (and
no doubt longer, but I never paid close attention before), and
this is in no small part due to Steve's diligence.

Unfortunately, as most of this activity is just one-shot messages
to the list, it's nearly impossible to summarise, so casual readers
of this summary have no idea of the work Steve does. So, thank-you
Steve.

Information concerning bugs referenced in this summary (as #nnnnn)
may be viewed at http://rt.perl.org/rt3/Ticket/Display.html?id=nnnnn

Information concerning patches to maint or blead referenced in
this summary (as #nnnnn) may be viewed at
http://public.activestate.com/cgi-bin/perlbrowse?patch=nnnnn

Weekly summaries are published on F<http://use.perl.org/> and posted
on a mailing list, (subscription: F<perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org>).
The archive is at F<http://dev.perl.org/perl5/list-summaries/>.
Corrections and comments are welcome.

If you found this summary useful or enjoyable, please consider
contributing to the Perl Foundation to help support the development
of Perl.
