=head1 This Week on perl5-porters - 7-13 November 2005

This week was really, like David Landgren uses to say, a
business week. Many short threads, many bug fixes, 
not all particularly earth-shattering, but Perl is even more solid.

=head2 Feedback from Last Week's Summary

About the sort/multicall patch,
Robin Houston hushed to say that the ability to empty the array
B<while you sort it> and still retrieve the results has never worked.
The point was that Robin added a test for this feature, 
which slipped into the patch sent to the list. 

    http://xrl.us/ifnf

Steven Schubiger may stop assuming his patch on POD estetics
was overlooked: Rafael applied it seamlessly. 

    http://xrl.us/ifng

=head2 See perl C<say()> (continued)

Robin Houston argued about a possible implementation
of C<pp_say>, in a followup to last week's discussion.
Rafael Garcia-Suarez made a few points and admitted himself
not enthusiastic about adding a new keyword to perl,
mainly a weak keyword. And things stand still in this matter.

    http://xrl.us/ifnh

=head2 C<print FILEHANDLE>

Steve Peters hitted the undocumented behavior of 
C<print FILEHANDLE> which DWIM outputting C<$_>
to the specified filehandle. He also noticed some
inconsistencies like C<print {STDERR}> being
a syntax error and C<B::Deparse> being unprepared
for this kind of expressions. Rafael Garcia-Suarez
said it doesn't look easy to fix without weird side-effects.

    http://xrl.us/ifni

=head2 C<&=> and C<m//> Misbehavior

Anno Siegel reported the bug #37616 in the last week,
about a malfunction of C<&=> operator on strings combined
with some pattern match (mentioned in the previous summary). 
There ensued some discussion where
Abigail brought the confirmation that C<&=> is working as documented 
in F<perlop.pod>, section "Bitwise String Operators".
In turn, Sadahiro Tomoyuki showed how the issues with simple regexes 
exposed some trouble
with handling NUL-terminated strings which sometimes are
visible at the Perl level and sometimes are just an internals thingy.
Rafael Garcia-Suarez and Nicholas Clark confessed to be bothered
by such limitations, which Nicholas thought it could
be a nice bug to fix and which may lead us to a nice bug fix real soon.

    The discussion of the ticket enters this week
    http://xrl.us/ifnj

=head2 Bad Locales in Mac OS X

On a followup to ticket #36061, Steve Peters added a change
to F<README.macosx> about yet another broken locale file,
namely eu_ES (Basque-Spain). This shows up as test failures
in F<../lib/locale.t>. Dominic Dunlop explained these
test failures now are being suppressed, by skipping the offending
locales, avoiding worries to perl builds on Mac OS X.
Dominic also proposed a throrough update of F<README.macosx>
which was applied. With the change, Steve Peters also closed
ticket #35895 which concerned this same locale.

    http://xrl.us/ifnk

=head2 Dying in map, grep, sort

On RT ticket #24354, Chris Heath provided a rather detailed
description of how the test cases below cause attempts
to free unreferenced scalars.

    perl -e 'map die,4 for 3'
    perl -e 'grep die,4 for 3'
    perl -e 'for $a (3) {@b=sort {die} 4,5}'

The bug had to do with the interaction between how map, grep, sort
automatically localize certain variables and an odd behavior
when unwinding context and save stacks due to an exception. 
Rafael Garcia-Suarez applied Chris' patch as change #26027
to bleadperl.

    http://xrl.us/ifnm

=head2 Behave Yourself, C<ucfirst>

Nicholas Clark opened ticket
#37628 to tell about his finding C<ucfirst> can malform UTF-8.
Nicholas' inspection of the code revealed some bad assumptions
about lengths (in UTF-8) and exposed the ill-behaved code.
He then noticed C<lcfirst> had its own bug as well.
And then he patched the issue(s) with change 26034
and closed the ticket, setting a model for a most productive
monologue in RT.

    http://xrl.us/ifnn

=head2 Perl on Symbian

Jarkko Hietaniemi brought the latest of his
work on the Symbian port of Perl, reaching release 
0.4.0 with a lot done on the UI side (including
improved support to S60 and S80 devices and UIQ).

    First patch
    http://xrl.us/ifno
    Second patch
    http://xrl.us/ifnp

=head2 C<List::Util> issues

B< C<DProf> breaks C<shuffle> >
Ticket #32383 was opened by Jarkko Hietaniemi to report
problems while using C<DProf> together with C<List::Util::shuffle>.
Even though the error message has been changing, 
it was still there. Robin Houston proposed a patch and
was advised by Graham Barr about the use of C<Perl_seed>
which was not refactored until 5.8.1. Robin pulled together
changes in Graham's svn repository more PUSH_MULTICALL
changes, and after some tweaks, the patches were applied,
hopefully fixing the issue.

    Rafael shows the actual message by bleadperl
    http://xrl.us/ifnq

B< Memory Leaks in C<first> >
Tassilo von Parseval opened ticket #37643 to say
about memory leaks in C<List::Util::first>. Dave Mitchell
remembered this issue is already fixed in blead by now.

    http://xrl.us/ifnr

=head2 Code Unification for Cygwin, Win32 and WinCE

Yitzchak Scott-Thoennes wondered about the forked code
originally from F<win32/win32.c> duplicated in
Cygwin module C<Win32CORE> and the status of
C<Win32> module, core for Win32 but available for Cygwin
only as part of the C<libwin32> distribution. 
Yitzchak planned to see these converging
to a common code, where synchronicity will not be
lost again. Jan Dubois gave a full account of the differences
to be found between blead and C<libwin32> and noticed
that the wince branch also copied some of this
Win32 code. 

    http://xrl.us/ifns

To Jan, the starting point of this unification was
the elimination of USING_WIDE codebranches that
have been unused since the introduction of internal
UTF8 support for PVs. And, indeed, Jan assembled a patch
towards this goal of improving maintainability
and the sharing with Cygwin.

    http://xrl.us/ifnt

=head2 Cygwin Configure

Yitzchak Scott-Thoennes and H.Merijn Brand exchanged a rather
long series of messages while tighting up issues with
Configure on Cygwin. In the end, it looks 
more stable now.

    http://xrl.us/ifnu

=head2 Perl on WinCE

WinCE port of Perl received a little love this week. Vadim Konovalov 
posted a patch to make 5.8.7 compilable for WinCE platform.
H.Merijn Brand called for a patch against blead first and
Vadim promised to do just that during this week. 
Later, he sent in the revised patch and Steve Hay explained
how some issues that apply to build configuration on
Win32 and AIX may be needed as well for WinCE.

    http://xrl.us/ifnv

=head2 C<DB_File> 1.814

Dominic Dunlop observed which an old warning
on Darwin from F<ext/DB_File/t/db-btree.t>
could go away for the recent revisions of the OS
and posted a patch to do that. Paul Marquess
took the change to the official DB_File
with the release of 1.814 and a corresponding
patch to blead.

    Dominic gets rid of old Darwin warning
    http://xrl.us/ifnw
    Paul Marquess announces DB_File 1.814
    http://xrl.us/ifnx

=head2 C<CPAN> 1.76_65

Andreas Koenig brought F<CPAN.pm> up to version 1.76_65.

    http://xrl.us/ifny

=head2 C<Time::HiRes> 1.82

Jarkko Hietaniemi has had a busy time with many, many releases
of C<Time::HiRes>, eluding porters, smokes and summarizer.
I guess by now C<Time::HiRes> in blead must have reached
version 1.82 as the CPAN release.

=head2 Nuking Globals and Stashes

Robin Houston remembered April 2001 when people talked
about nice ways to make perl dump by nuking
important globals. For example,

    perl -e 'delete $::{"@"}; warn'
    perl -e 'delete $::{"_"}; sub{}->()'

Back then, Benjamin Sugars proposed a fix still working against
blead and dying to be applied. Steve Peters had a look, found
the related ticket #5851, made some changes 
and got us rid of these core dumps.

    Benjamin Sugars' long-forgotten patch
    http://xrl.us/ifnz
    Robin Houston ressurects the issue
    http://xrl.us/ifn2
    Steve Peters closes RT ticket #5851
    http://xrl.us/ifn3

=head2 Perl on EBCDIC

B< C<pack('E', $arg)> on perl-5.8.7 >
Rajarshi Das posted a notice on how C<pack('E', $arg)> worked 
on EBCDIC platforms in perl-5.005_03
and it is not supported anymore on perl-5.8.7 and called 
for an alternative. Dave Mitchell and Sadahiro Tomoyuki observed
Radarshi's perl must be a non-standard modification, since
the "E" option is not present in the official 5.005_03 distribution.
Rajarshi explained the 'E' is meant to turn ascii string inputs
into EBCDIC results. He also agreed the extra option was
locally introduced and was not available as part of the general
source. Sadahiro suggested two alternative methods: one using
the undocumented C<utf8::unicode_to_native()> and other using 
C<pack('U', $arg)> but warned about issues that may arise
between the new UTF8 behavior and old scripts.

    http://xrl.us/ifn4

B< C<cond_timedwait> Issues >
Mohammad Yaseen found some errors while playing with
C<cond_timedwait> on EBCDIC platform. Yaseen showed the issues
with an extended test adapted from F<cond.t> and hinted on
possible causes.

    http://xrl.us/ifn5

=head2 C<Storable> Updates

Gisle Aas posted a patch to restore C<Storable> compatibility
allowing the newer versions to read files written by
Storable-0.1. Then Gisle sent in another patch with
a now documented C<read_magic()> function to decode image
headers and also a C<file_magic()> function. Steve Peters
applied both patches with these new features that come 
handy for dealing with C<Storable> on any platform.

    Gisle restores Storable compatibility
    http://xrl.us/ifn6
    Gisle brings read_magic() to the foreground
    http://xrl.us/ifn7

=head2 Handling Security Advisories

"Jack" opened bug #37662 to ask what address a security
advisory regarding perl could be send to. H.Merijn Brand and Abigail
advised to use the perl5-porters mailing list, discussing here
in the open. Nicholas Clark, Dave Mitchell, and Andreas Koenig
appreciated the point of keeping safe sensitive information from
end-users, at least by the time necessary to fix the problem.
Rafael Garcia-Suarez and Michael Cummings compared this to the
infrastructure for handling security advisories by OS vendors.

    http://xrl.us/ifn8

=head2 Playing Games with gcc

Brendan O'Dea noticed gcc 4 no longer emits "Reading specs from ..." but rather
"Using built-in specs." and posted an alternate mechanism to locate the gcc include directory.
H.Merijn Brand wondered in which version of gcc the option
C<--print-libgcc-file-name> used by Brendan was introduced, for
which Brendan and Abe Timmerman supplied some answers.
Jason Vas Dias pointed he raised bug #37582 about this
with a patch accepted as change #26074.

    Steve Peters applies Jason's patch
    http://xrl.us/ifn9
    Brendan's post
    http://xrl.us/ifoa

=head2 Perl5 Bug Summary

The open tickets count was at 1528 in Nov 7 14:00 GMT. 
But this had been a frantic week at bug's front:
in a rough counting, perl5-porters received around 
240 messages, in about 100 threads, and only Steve
Peters closed at least 18 tickets.
The next week should inevitably start with
a lower score at the bugs count.

    Robert Spier and the Bug summary
    http://xrl.us/ifob
    Perl RT just now
    http://rt.perl.org/rt3/NoAuth/perl5/Overview.html

=head2 In Brief

B< Fixing C<gmtime> Docs >
In RT ticket #35840, Michael Schwern reported C<gmtime>
under 5.8.6,
unlike documented, returns 9 rather than 8 values.
F<perlfunc> was fixed with change #26024 by Steve Peters.

    http://xrl.us/ifoc

B< C<File::Glob> and Its Origins >
On a followup to bug #37597, Steve Peters observed 
"there have been some changes between the Perl C<bsd_glob()> and the original OpenBSD glob 
function where it came from." He'll look into merging the OpenBSD changes in soon.

    http://xrl.us/ifod

B< F<perldiag> issues >
Steve Peters closed RT tickets #3190 and #7543 about minor F<perldiag> issues.

    http://xrl.us/ifoe
    http://xrl.us/ifof

B< Redefining Sort Subs via C<goto> >
Steve Peters reported on the solution of bug #7579, which 
concerned core dumps when redefining comparison routines
via C<goto &NAME>. After a recent change to bleadperl,
the behavior we get from now on is saner. And another ticked closed.

    ./perl -wle 'sub s1 { goto &s2 } sub s2 { $a cmp $b } print sort s1 (3, 2, 1)' 
    Can't goto subroutine from a sort sub (or similar callback) at -e line 1.

    http://xrl.us/ifog

B<A Surprising Segfault (continued)>
In a followup to last week's thread, Dave Mitchell added that, like
Rafael Garcia-Suarez, he believed the nature of the tests 
being applied to various C<pp_*> functions
may be dubious, which calls for more assertions in code
and better tests.

    http://xrl.us/ifoh

B< 5.8.7 on AIX failing C<make test> >
Sujeet Kulkarni asked for help to resolve problems while
running C<make test> on AIX. Dominic Dunlop provided some guesswork
and H.Merijn Brand added a few hints regarding AIX oddities.

    http://xrl.us/ifoi

B<Panic with Multiple Encodings> Steve Peters noticed the reported bug
was gone with bleadperl. The above command does not panic anymore.

    perl -Ilib -Mencoding=iso-8859-1 -wle'binmode STDOUT,
        ":encoding(iso-8859-1)" or die "binmode:$!"; 
        print "\xe1", "\n";'
    "\x{128a}" does not map to iso-8859-1 at -e line 1.

    http://xrl.us/ifoj

B< C<if.pm> vs Other Long-Forgotten Patches >
Rafael applied a patch by Ilya Zakharevich to give more meaningful error
messages from F<if.pm> when invoked with a condition in list
context. Ilya greeted the change, as he was afraid of that taking
the route of tens of other patches waiting forever. 

    http://xrl.us/ifok

B< Silencing C<ExtUtils> Tests >
Dominic Dunlop posted a patch to supress some leaked warnings
in C<ExtUtils> tests which was applied by Rafael Garcia-Suarez.
It seemed like these tests waited long enough for Schwern's
touch after behavior change of C<cmp_ok> in C<Test::More>.

    http://xrl.us/ifom

B< 5.6.1 Install/Compile on Solaris 8 >
Steve Peters urged for more information in diagnosing
bug #9727. Andy Dougherty explained it had to with the output
by newer gcc's, mentioned a short-term fix and confirmed
perl 5.8.x handles this just fine. To Andy, it is a ticket
to be closed.

    http://xrl.us/ifon

B< Crashes in Multithreaded Server >
Zefram opened ticket #37652 to tell about crashes
in a multithreaded server which may result in terminating
or locking up the application. He posted a test program
to reproduce the issue and stack traces obtained with gdb.
Currently Warnocked.

    http://xrl.us/ifoo

B< F<English.pm> and C<$COMPILING> >
Dan Tierra noticed the English name for C<$^C>, namely C<$COMPILING>,
does not get exported when doing C<use English qw(-no_match_vars);>.
Steve Peters added the variable to the list of exports with change
#26080.

    http://xrl.us/ifop

B< C<OTHERLDFLAGS> in C<ExtUtils::MakeMaker> >
Steve Peters replied bug #37433 which concerns a patch to
MakeMaker. Fearful of accidental breaking C<ExtUtils::MakeMaker>,
he announced the patch was sent off to rt.cpan.org queue.

    http://xrl.us/ifoq

B< C<PERLIO_DEBUG> Patch >
Peter Dintelmann found that setting the environment variable
C<PERLIO_DEBUG> as described in F<perlapio.pod> could result in
segfaults and proposed a patch, applied to blead as change #26075.

    http://xrl.us/ifor

B< C<binmode H, ":pop"> Patch >
Peter 'Segfault-Killer' Dintelmann, in ticket #37557, showed how
calling C<binmode()> after popping the last IO layer results
in a segfault and proposed a patch, applied as change 26101.

    http://xrl.us/ifos

B<Andy's Const & Local Mission>
Andy Lester went on with his tireless mission
of bringing consting and localizing goodness to
Perl source code.

    http://xrl.us/ifot

B<mathoms on VMS>
John E. Malmberg posted a patch to add a compile rule
which is needed for VMS to compile F<mathoms.c>. He also
inquired on a few things that need to be resolved in
order to allow blead to build on VMS.

    http://xrl.us/ifou

B<Mathoms with Proper Prototypes>
Andy Lester noticed the mathoms functions weren't using proper
prototypes, causing gcc to complain. Steve Peters applied
Andy's fix as change #26099.

    http://xrl.us/ifov

B<blead@26091 on VMS>
Abe Timmerman posted the results of blead snapshot @26091 on VMS. No feedback yet. 

    http://xrl.us/ifow

B< C<abs2rel("/foo/bar", "/foo/bar")> >
David Golden recently reported problems in C<Path::Class>
which Ken Williams traced to an odd behavior in C<File::Spec>:
C<abs2rel("/foo/bar", "/foo/bar")> returns the empty string
rather than C<"."> or something sensible. Before fixing it,
Ken asked what are the likely issues.

    http://xrl.us/ifox

B<Extending the stack inside ops>
Nicholas Clark found an apparent problem which could
mean that extending the stack while inside ops
would be a bad thing. Dave Mitchell explained the
applicable rule, namely, it's the responsibility of the things
doing the call to push a new stack. So Nicholas made
the appropriate change for the case in question and called
for feedback on the way he did it.

    http://xrl.us/ifoy

B<Localizing Shared Variables>
"dean" noticed that
localizing variables bound to shared variables can cause the shared
variable to become undefined and provided tests to make his point.
No one answered so far.

    http://xrl.us/ifoz

=head2 About this summary

This summary was written by Adriano Ferreira.

Information concerning bugs referenced in this summary (as #nnnnn)
may be viewed at http://rt.perl.org/rt3/Ticket/Display.html?id=nnnnn

Information concerning patches to maint or blead referenced in
this summary (as #nnnnn) may be viewed at
http://public.activestate.com/cgi-bin/perlbrowse?patch=nnnnn

Weekly summaries are published on F<http://use.perl.org/> and posted
on a mailing list, (subscription: F<perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org>).
The archive is at F<http://dev.perl.org/perl5/list-summaries/>.
Corrections and comments are welcome.

If you found this summary useful or enjoyable, please consider
contributing to the Perl Foundation to help support the development
of Perl.

