=head1 This Week on perl5-porters - 11-20 November 2005

The crackdown. A number of bugs were fixed this week, possibly
obsolete code was scrutinised, Hugo patched the regexp engine and
Perl on Windows was improved.

=head2 C<h2ph> finds C<gcc>'s include directory

Brendan O'Dea posted a patch to use the C<gcc> command line switch
C<--print-libgcc-file-name> to locate the C<gcc> include directory.
The previous technique of parsing C<gcc -v> no longer works on
version 4.

H.Merijn Brand wanted to know when C<--print-libgcc-file-name> was
introduced (otherwise things would start failing for older gcc
compilers). Brendan said that he had reached as far back as 2.95,
and the switch was supported. Abe Timmerman chipped in with a
justifiably ancient 2.7.2.2 gcc compiler that also
supported the switch.

Jason Vas Dias pointed to bug #37582 that he had filed on the issue,
and that the patch had been applied by Steve Peters as change #26074.

  Brendan's patch
  http://xrl.us/iiau

  Jason's patch
  https://rt.perl.org/rt3/Ticket/Display.html?id=37582

=head2 Eliminating discrete arenaroots

Jim Cromie issued a reworked, tested on threaded and unthreaded,
patch to remove the fifteen different type-specific arenaroots,
and asked people to have a smoke. Nicholas Clark went over the
patch very carefully and made a number of suggestions, and
Jim proposed a revision of the patch, which Nicholas applied as
#26139.

After looking at Nicholas's reworking of the patch, Jim added a
number of corrections to the comments in the code, and then posted
a series of benchmark results showing that the patch should have
made things go faster (with the usual proviso about statistics).

Later in the week, Jim came back with another patch that gathered
the arenas into a linked list. This has some upsides and some
downsides, but notably, it allows the possibility of exposing
the arena to allow performance tuning.

  The elimination
  http://xrl.us/iiav

  Benchmark results
  http://xrl.us/iiaw

  RFC - linked list of arenas
  http://xrl.us/iiax

=head2 A better warning in maint

Yitzchak Scott-Thoennes asked whether change #22807, which makes
C<$^O !~ /xxx/> emit the warning C<Useless use of negative pattern
binding (!~ in void context)> instead of C<Useless use of not in
void context> should be applied to maint. Nicholas yelped in pain
and whispered something about perl 5.10. Yitzchak sympathised, and
went through his own blead patches, evaluating which ones were
worthy (safe enough) to be applied to maint.

  The question
  http://xrl.us/iiay

  Yitzchak's list
  http://xrl.us/iiaz

=head2 C<h2xs> and backwards compatibility

Steven Schubiger voiced his disquiet over the way h2xs ties the
Perl version of the module to the module of perl installed on
the author's machine (even when it might run perfectly well on
any number of prior versions).

Rafael Garcia-Suarez agreed that the orginal design decisions was
probably incorrect and Nicholas remembered a previous thread on the matter,
which Steven tracked down. Sébastien Aperghis-Tramoni
was annoyed by modules that failed to install on 5.8.5 because
they required 5.8.7, and wondered if it wouldn't be better to
focus on the branch version (that is, 5.8), rather than relying
on the subversion (the x in 5.8.x), and offered a patch. And also
pointed out that C<XSLoader> is backwards-compatible as far back
as C<5.005_04>.

Rafael declined to pick up the patch, pointing out that there
is no way of ensuring that code that runs on 5.8.x will run on
5.8.x-1 and lower.

This latter point prompted David Nicol to ask whether any
documentation existed relating feature to version, and when
the feature moved from absent, to experimental, to robust.

  Doubts over h2xs
  http://xrl.us/iia2

  2001, a Perl odyssey
  http://xrl.us/iia3

=head2 Abigail and the regexp engine

Abigail posted some code where it was expected that
C<'A B' =~ /^(.)\s+.$(?(1))/> should match. In 5.005 it
used to work, but from 5.6.0 and beyond it fails.

Andreas König tried to track down the patch that
caused the change in behaviour, but C<gcc> got in the way.
In fact, depending on whether he used version 3.2.3 or
4.0.3 the pattern matched, or didn't, respectively.

Hugo van der Sanden burnt a precious tuit or two and
rummaged around in the regexp engine internals and
made a one-line change that fixed the problem, but
said that he didn't have time to study the ramifications
implied by the patch and noted that "C<intuit_start> is
probably the least maintainable piece of code in perl".

  Now why would you want to do a thing like that?
  http://xrl.us/iia4

=head2 Tracking down a Win32 smoke failure

One of Steve Hay's boxes phoned home with a smoke failure.
After first ignoring it and hoping it would just go away
of its own accord, Steve had a closer look and noticed that
it was a real bug, and only occurred when C<PERL_IMPLICIT_SYS>
was defined. Unfortunately, this particular C<#define> is needed
by ActivePerl, and Steve tracked the change in behaviour
down to patch #26108. A three line change to tweak stacks
in C<BEGIN> blocks.

Nicholas shrunk the problem down to a neat

  #!./perl -w

  BEGIN {
    $SIG{INT} = sub {exit(0)};
    kill 'INT', $$;
  }

which causes a little known routine named C<S_unwind_handler_stack>
to blow up. After a certain amount of detective work, he was able
to show quite clearly I<why> the code was failing, but was at a
loss as to I<how> to fix it.

Steve Hay pointed to a thread from last year where Jan Dubois posted
a patch that seemed promising at the time, but for whatever reason
was never polished and applied to blead.

Jan spoke up and offered a bit more detail about how the patch
worked, and what it needed in order to be complete. The next day
he came back with a much better version. Stever Peters applied it
and all the tests passed. Yay Jan!

  Smoke issues forth
  http://xrl.us/iia5

  The offending patch
  http://public.activestate.com/cgi-bin/perlbrowse?patch=26108

  "free to wrong pool", circa January 2004
  http://xrl.us/iia6

=head2 Is C<STRANGE_MALLOC> still useful?

Nicholas wondered about the different code paths taken depending
on whether C<STRANGE_MALLOC> is defined. He wondered whether it
would be safe to assume that C<malloc>/C<realloc>/C<free> work
correctly these days, and that by chainsawing it out we would
escape some no-longer-needed complexity?

Andy Dougherty supplied a valuable history lesson, explaining
why things came to be the way they are. And concurring that at
this point in time, it could possibly get the axe, but it would
be important to try out a couple of big applications to see how
they fare.

  Compare the simple code path to the complex code path
  http://xrl.us/iia7

  Sarathy's 1995 summary of the problem
  http://xrl.us/iia8

=head2 When errors are reported on the wrong line

David Hillman crafted a detailed bug report concerning errors
being reported on the wrong line (which of course tends to
drive people insane when they try debugging it).

Dave Mitchell, noting the relative frequency with which these
sorts of bug reports tend to appear, wondering what the cost
benefit ratio would be of using up more memory per op in order
to keep accurate track of the current line.

Jim Cromie came up with what he termed a rather ugly solution
to the matter. Then again, beauty is in the eye of the beholder.
Dave Mitchell followed up with some preliminary numbers on the
memory cost. The concensus is that a certain amount of memory
could be traded for the peace of mind it would bring.

  The bug report
  http://xrl.us/iia9

  An ugly fix
  http://xrl.us/iiba

=head2 Sun Studio compiler for Linux

Steve Peters tweaked F<hints/linux.sh> to get the Sun Studio compilers
for Linux up and running. The results are promising, although the patch,
in Steve's own opinion, needs work.

He also used it to take a look at Jarkko Hietaniemi's C<valgrind>
finding from last month.

  The tweak
  http://xrl.us/iibb

  Problems with sprintf()
  http://xrl.us/iibc

  Jarkko's valgrind discovery last month
  http://xrl.us/iibd

=head2 Perl 5 Bug Summary

The current number of open issues stands at 1508.

  The bugs at the beginning of the week
  http://xrl.us/iibe
  
  The Bug Summary
  http://rt.perl.org/rt3/NoAuth/perl5/Overview.html

=head2 In brief

B<C<abs2rel("/foo/bar", "/foo/bar")>> should return C<'.'> or
something else sensible, according to Ken Williams (and not an empty
string).  After asking around if anything other than C<File::Spec>
relied on the behaviour, Ken went ahead and fixed the problem in
C<Path::Class>.

  http://xrl.us/iibf

B<C<local> and C<thread::shared> don't mix>. "dean" filed bug
#37671 showing how localising variables bound to shared variables can
cause the shared variable to become undefined. At least in version
5.8.4.

  http://xrl.us/iibg

B<C<Compress::Zlib> should now build nicely> on Win32 environments,
now that Paul Marquess has fixed a lurking C<binmode> bug.

  http://xrl.us/iibh

B<Recent C<const>ing changes> to the codebase had broken C<perlbug>'s
ability to grok F<patchlevel.h>. Yitzchak filed a patch to make it
work again and threw some compatibility future-proofing into the
bargain.

  http://xrl.us/iibi

B<Dynamically appending code to an existing file>. Jos I. Boumans
wants to do this from time to time, and showed several techniques
for implementing it, however, only two methods work. Looking at
C<pp_require> in F<pp_ctl.c>, it looks as if the code is going
straight to the file, rather than going through a higher layer.
Jos asked if this could or should be fixed, or nailed down in the
documentation. No takers.

  http://xrl.us/iibj

B<Another source of segmentation faults killed>. Peter Dintelmann
followed on from last week and continued to nail segfaults. He noted
that executing the code snippet C<PerlIO::get_layers undef> would
end in grief and patched F<universal.c> to make it work correctly
(or rather, not crash). Applied by Steve Peters as #26144.

  http://xrl.us/iibk

Vadim Konovalov supplied B<a patch make WinCE compile blead>
and wondered whether F<./wince> shouldn't be made a subdirectory
of the F<./win32> directory in the source tree. H.Merijn made a few
remarks about the patch, basically prodding Vadim to give himself
and Rainer a bit more credit in the README.

  http://xrl.us/iibm

B<When in doubt, use brute force.> "fbriere" noted a cute bug: if
you require a module that dies when it is loaded, it fails the first
time. But the second time, it succeeds!

  http://xrl.us/iibn

Andy Lester took a preliminary run through the codebase and B<axed
the ancient RCS commit comments> in the source. (These days the
codebase is managed in a Perforce repository).

  http://xrl.us/iibo

=head2 About this summary

This summary was written by David Landgren.

Information concerning bugs referenced in this summary (as #nnnnn)
may be viewed at http://rt.perl.org/rt3/Ticket/Display.html?id=nnnnn

Information concerning patches to maint or blead referenced in
this summary (as #nnnnn) may be viewed at
http://public.activestate.com/cgi-bin/perlbrowse?patch=nnnnn

Weekly summaries are published on F<http://use.perl.org/> and posted
on a mailing list, (subscription: F<perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org>).
The archive is at F<http://dev.perl.org/perl5/list-summaries/>.
Corrections and comments are welcome.

If you found this summary useful or enjoyable, please consider
contributing to the Perl Foundation to help support the development
of Perl.
