=head1 This Week on perl5-porters - 12-18 September 2005

Nicholas Clark announced the plan for perl 5.8.8, so it
was only fitting that someone should post a question asking
how to compile 5.004. Elsewhere there continued to be lots
of discussion of VMS, carrying on from last week. All told,
a fairly busy week with lots of single post threads, which
made summarising a bit difficult. 

=head2 5.8.8 is Coming

Nicholas Clark posted a plan for 5.8.8. 

The deadline for changes (in blead, to be integrated in maint) is
B<16th October 2005>. He will be "mostly incommunicado" for the first
weeks of October, but explained that it isn't a problem. Fixes of
bugs in pseudohashes and 5.005 threads go directly to maint and
little else does. Steve Peters suggested that changes to re-entrant
functions could be another exception, but for Nicholas it would
have to wait for someone to figure out how to merge the code.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-09/msg00223.html

  The Current TODO
  http://mirrors.develooper.com/perl/APC/perl-current/pod/perltodo.pod

=head2 New Core Module Releases

Jarkko Hietaniemi, fulfilling the promise of last week's "Math::Complex
atan2 bug" thread, announced a patch with several pending updates
for C<Math::Complex> and C<Math::Trig>.

The result of C<atan2(0,0)> is now documented as being
dependent on the underlying library.

Nadeem Douba pointed what he called a small technical bug. He called
for an optional argument, C<rho>, to the subroutine
C<great_circle_destination> and explained the rationale of a solution.
Jarkko countered that he was confused by the proposal, which does
not fit the usual concept of radians. The default coordinate system
cannot be changed without breaking existing code and there is no
I<correct> spherical coordinate system. He proposed a special export
tag as a possible way to incorporate Nadeem's suggestion.

John Peacock released version-0.48 to CPAN and a corresponding patch
vs. bleadperl. A pure Perl implementation is coming and John hopes
he soon will be done with this project. But before that, the PAUSE
indexer needs to be fixed and C<CPANPLUS>, C<CPAN>, C<Module::Build>
patched to use F<version.pm> "fulltime".

=head2 Zlib on VMS

The efforts to make C<Compress::Zlib> work in blead on VMS continue.
A long thread developed involving John E. Malmberg, Paul Marquess 
(C<Compress::Zlib>), Tom Hughes (C<IO::Zlib>), Jarkko Hietaniemi (external 
gzip support in C<IO::Zlib>). It seems there are a zillion options 
to configure VMS Unix emulation and not all of these are handled 
gracefully by the Perl source code. Uncertainty concerning
the differences of environment remains.

The thread went on under the subject "Zlib 2.00_03 / Blead 25366 
on VMS + patched vms.c" where John Malmberg and Paul Marquess 
continued the detective work. John's last message is investigating 
a possible problem with C<glob()> on VMS which can be responsible for 
some of the test failures. It was found that by just removing
leading "./" from directory variables on a test script
made all its tests to pass. Craig Berry explained how limited
is the home-grown glob() on VMS and John Malmberg
notices that, as of OpenVMS 7.3-2, a C<glob()> function is
provided in the C library that is better be used on
releases that supported it.

Paul Marquess and John Malmberg went on to discuss
issues on the consistency of VMS conversions
and how it could be made better. Peter Prymer
confirmed some VMS oddities on filename handling.

    ZLIB 2.0 / Blead 25366 on VMS 
    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-09/msg00200.html

=head2 More VMS Issues

John E. Malmberg spotted a bug on the VMS specific C<Perl_cando()>
and squashed it with patch @25388. H. Merijn Brand applied it.

    The patch
    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-09/msg00243.html

John also confirmed C<ExtUtils::CBuilder> 0.13_01 tests ok.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-09/msg00238.html

He added a few comments on the discussion with Ken Williams about
an enhanced file spec handling for current VMS versions. 

The week closed with the posting by John Malmberg of an RFC
proposing some VMS behavior changes. Apparently those changes
may improve the consistency and precision of VMS perl.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-09/msg00395.html

=head2 Fiddling with the Bloody Grammar

After the closing act of Michael Schwern, there was some subsequent
traffic. Randal Schwartz discussed using "for example", "such as",
"and so on" to say precisely what we mean. He thought it may be
used as a general guideline for future writings, without crusades
to fix it "in the past".

There was silence for a while. And then David Nicol offered a 92K
patch over 5.9.2 replacing every C<e\.?g\.?> and C<i\.?e\.?> with
I<for example> and I<that is>. Adding commas and removing C<< IE<lt>italicsE<gt> >>
were left as an exercise for some willing person. No one volunteered.

    Michael closes
    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-09/msg00236.html

    Randal's advice
    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-09/msg00278.html

    Chainsaw patch
    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-09/msg00282.html

=head2 OS X 10.4 Issues

"make test" for maint on OXS 10.4 fails F<lib/locale.t>.
Randal says: "At least it fails on only one thing".
Rafael remembers it's a problem
with system locales. Dominic Dunlop notices
this problem is recorded as bug #35895 (and 
logged as a bug with Apple as well - with no
return). Dominic proposes a patch on Darwin
to skip lib/locale.t tests on locales containing
eu_ES as well as Byelorussian and Catalan locales.
It applies to versions between 8.0.0 and 8.2.0,
and hopefully will get fixed on the next Apple release.
Patch applied.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-09/msg00312.html


Randal L. Schwartz posted a test failure building Storable on OS X.
It basically said "no weak references here". Steve Peters
remembered seeing something similar before: the default Perl on
OS X 10.4 was built without compiling the XS portion of C<Scalar::Utils>.
A fresh install of C<Scalar::Utils> fixes the problem. Randal checked
it and thought Storable would need C<Scalar::Util> as a prereq in order
to have the the issue handled automatically.

Fixing the Storable's test to ignore the "weak isn't supported"
error would be the bug report for p5p. Nicholas Clark said that
Randal should send a bug report to his Perl distributor asking "why isn't it
installing the XS version of a core module?"
Randal insisted that 'maintperl' was used. Nicholas
and Randal have not reached a consensus yet.

To be continued, no doubt, next week.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-09/msg00312.html

=head2 Configuring ranlib for perl on OSX

Steve Peters revived the interest in a bug (#36448) and patch
reported by Luke Closs back in July. It concerned a change
Apple did in how ar works in Tiger and was a "rather simple change".
As a matter of fact, H. Merijn Brand had it in his queue and had
been waiting for someone with access to a MacOS-like OS. Nicholas
checked it and applied it.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-09/msg00184.html

=head2 The Return of the Consting

Background: Andy Lester has been spending his copious spare time
in the recent months bringing const (and other goodies) to the perl
sources, the rationale being to piggy-back the analysis that modern
compilers can perform as a way to help squash bugs.

Andy was back with a 13K "patch of accumulated goodness", promptly
applied by H. Merijn. Robin Barker reported still getting warning
messages related to attributes.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-09/msg00246.html

=head2 Optional arrow operator on C<< (LIST)[LIST]-> >>

The thread named "perlref Documentation About Optional -> Is Too Vague"
has long changed to a proposal on a syntax extension.
Prodded by Yitzchak Scott-Thoennes, Rafael Garcia-Suarez applied a
patch that made the following syntactically correct:

    my $x = (foo())[0][1];

just like 

    my $x = (foo())[0]->[1];

Sometime ago, he had expressed a minor concern on the possibility
it allows to people unaware of the problem write 
non-backwards-compatible code with 5.10. Back then, Yitzchak 
answered that could be a reason not to
include the patch in maint. Rafael thought that was the case, but
Nicholas Clark has the final word.

    Yitzchak pings
    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-09/msg00224.html

    Rafael answers
    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-09/msg00276.html

=head2 Pod Indexing Project Status and Plan

Ivan Tubert-Brohman reported on the current status of the Pod
Indexing Project, with a nice summary and details. He pointed the
perl-5.8.8 deadline at Oct 16, 2005 and the opportunity to maximize
the number of indexed files. Volunteers are anxiously waited.

    The project page
    http://pod-indexing.annocpan.org/wiki/

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-09/msg00289.html

=head2 Instrumenting perl at Runtime

Alexander Kolbasov kicked off a long, fascinating thread discussing
DTrace, a Solaris tool that allows one to dynamically instrument a
running program and gather useful information about its behaviour. 
The first difficulty Alexander encountered was matching the underlying
C code to the Perl code being executed.

DTrace is being ported to FreeBSD and already
understands Java, PHP and Ruby.

Rafael pointed to Alan Burlison's work in the same
area, and pimped his own C<Runops::Switch> module, that allows you to
replace perl's runloop at (script) compile time. He also answered,
or provided pointers for, a number of questions raised by Alexander.

For it to really work, some adaptations need to be made to the
sources.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-09/msg00252.html

    Alan Burlison's blog
    http://blogs.sun.com/roller/page/alanbur?entry=dtrace_and_perl

=head2 Compiling perl 5.004

Shaun Daredia pleaded for help to get 5.004 running on some
Linux-type platform. The trouble is essentially that
5.004 is old, and the configuration script gets confused by
the results that modern versions of C<gcc> emit in response
to its probes. H. Merijn Brand provided a clue as to how to
fix the problem, but with no certainty.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-09/msg00298.html

=head2 PXPerl New Site

PXPerl is a full-featured Perl, Pugs and Parrot binary 
distribution for Windows. Grégoire Péan announced 
the new address for the project.

The current distribution PXPerl 5.8.7-4 contains Perl 5.8.7, 
Pugs 6.2.9 and Parrot 0.2.2. 

The aim of the project is to provide
an always up-to-date build. Vive Perl!
Vive Grégoire! Windows users must be grateful.

    The announcement
    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-09/msg00382.html

    The website
    http://pxperl.com/

=head2 Parallel Testing

Nicholas notices how the core regression test is getting more
comprehensive. This is a good thing, except that it takes longer
to run. He asks: would it be feasible to run tests in parallel?
Of course, it involves some issues to solve and he advances some
of them. This topic was entered in C<perltodo> which was reordered
so as to not scare people any more with brain-melting things.

Yuval Kogman stated that Pugs (the experimental Perl 6 compiler)
actually supports running tests in parallel.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-09/msg00379.html

=head2 Lots of warnings building 5.8.8@24637

Paul Marquess reports lots of warnings while
building 5.8.8@24637. Nicholas Clark answers most of
them are the same errors blead showed up
when Andy Lester started adding const to blead.
He hopes to see these warnings going away as
he brings in fixing patches. VMS or Windows
can be broken by those last changes, as Nicholas
were not able to try them yet. Andy asks
whether he can provide some help on this effort
and Nicholas says Andy's later changes needs
to be merged and then some work will be in 
order to get maint warning free again.

After carping on glibc headers,
Nicholas adds clean system headers to his growing wish list .

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-09/msg00371.html

=head2 C<malloc_size> and C<malloc_good_size>

Steve Peters announced the detection 
of malloc_size/malloc_good_size added to Configure.

John E. Malmberg produces a patch for VMS in
order to deal with the new configure parameters
C<malloc_size> and C<malloc_good_size>. Merijn
applied it and also asked if someone tested 
for problems with win32. Steve
Peters reported to not have seen any problems.

    The patch
    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-09/msg00329.html

    The fix
    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-09/msg00390.html

=head2 UTF8-Related Bug Reports

Christian Jaeger reported that taint mode still
breaks UTF-8 handling.
Problems can be seen with code as simple as

    use Encode;
    open F,"some/file/containing_utf8_text" or die $!;
    my $buf;
    read F,$buf,10,1000 or die $!;
    my $str= Encode::decode_utf8($buf);

Things work fine unless the -T switch is used. Dan "the Encode Maintainer" Kogai
duplicated the behaviour on 5.8.6, isolated it and wondered if a POD
fix is in order or is it an authentic undocumented bug?

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-09/msg00322.html

John Gardiner Myers shows a code snippet in bug #37161
where a thread writes ISO-88591-1 encoded
data when it should output UTF-8 instead. Code in
threads seems not to respect the C<:utf8> discipline.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-09/msg00292.html

Jim McKim registrated the bug #37183 about
the ability of the tiny script below to cause
perl to segfault. No reply yet.

    #!/usr/local/bin/perl -w
    use encoding 'utf8';
    my $x = /¨\.\//;

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-09/msg00353.html

=head2 Perl 5 Bug Summary

Robert Spier delivered  the Perl5 bug summary. 1508 open tickets. 
8 more I<gasp> than last week.

    The summary
    http://rt.perl.org/rt3/NoAuth/perl5/Overview.html

=head2 In Brief

Nicholas Clark followed up on a conversation
with Salvador Fandiño about how 
assertion support could be improved, including
opening new possibilities for what independent
modules can achieve with hooks affecting code in
compile time.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-09/msg00341.html

In bug #37190, Nicholas Clark reports OS X
and FreeBSD crashing when using C<-DT> with 
C<use warnings;> He suspects of a real bug
somewhere. Rick Delaney gives some clues
on the interpretation of the debugging log.

John Damm Sørensen reports in #37156 on a problem
on compiling 5.8.7 on IA64. It concerns
a well known issue for which some workarounds
are listed and have been found to work fine.
Nevertheless, these are not mentioned
in perl README files. 

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-09/msg00290.html

Rahul Sharma reported (in bug #37162) a problem during
'make test' on HP-UX using cc to compile Perl.
It had to do with missing gmake. But gmake
should not have being used. Merijn, Nicholas,
and Andy Dougherty discussed how it could have
happened, it it were a bug and how to fix it.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-09/msg00291.html

Hiroshi Manabe reported bug #37144, showing sample code which causes
very unpredictable results when running under the debugger.

    for ($i = 0; $i < 10; ++$i) {
        $temp = "\x{100}X";
        $temp =~ s/[^X]+//;  # bad things happen here (under the debugger)
    }

No-one offered any insights as to what was happening. Things like
this make you wonder how nobody encountered it before.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-09/msg00212.html

During work on a Pod processor, Joshua Hobblit
found quirks in the POD specs, C<Pod::Perldoc> and 
C<Pod::Parser>. Should the chunk

    bar
       baz

parse as an ordinary paragraph or
two separate ones (with "   baz" in a verbatim paragraph)? 
Rafael points Sean Burke as the one to clarify matters.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-09/msg00299.html

Aaron Kaplan reported in #37142 that C<h2xs> produces no code for
an enum constant with explicit negative value like
C<enum foo { bar = -1 }>. He supplied a patch and it was applied.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-09/msg00222.html

"Dentom_Sam" states in bug #37191 that he can consistently get the error:

    Can't call method "close" on an undefined value

on C<IPC::Open3>. He diagnosed it has to do with redirections
leading to failure and suggested a possible fix.

David Austin complains about C<IO::Select>
not having a way to distinguish between
timeout and errors. He suggests how
a timeout must be returned and mentions
how it is not documented what C<< IO::Select-E<gt>select >>
returns after a timeout.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-09/msg00340.html

Jos Boumans waved goodbye to the last smoke report
from a BSDI box, the last one of that particular server farm.
Yitzchak regrets they had never got a chance to track an F<op/int.t> failure.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-09/msg00306.html

=head2 About this summary

This summary was written by Adriano Ferreira with some additions
by David Landgren.

Information concerning bugs referenced in this summary (as #nnnnn)
may be viewed at http://rt.perl.org/rt3/Ticket/Display.html?id=nnnnn

Weekly summaries are published on F<http://use.perl.org/> and posted
on a mailing list, (subscription: F<perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org>).
The archive is at F<http://dev.perl.org/perl5/list-summaries/>.
Corrections and comments are welcome.

If you found this summary useful or enjoyable, please consider
contributing to the Perl Foundation to help support the development
of Perl.

