=head1 This Fortnight on perl5-porters - 12-25 December 2005

Perl 5 turns 18 and is given some lovely birthday presents, such as
Perl 6's switch, smart match and say. Constants get smaller, faster
and cheaper. So with all that and more, it's probably time for 5.9.3
to escape from the lab.

=head2 Patching C<sprintf>, all the time, everywhere

The C<sprintf> patch effort proceeded smoothly this week. Andy Dougherty
phoned in to give the patching of Solaris 8 a clean bill of health. But
Nicholas Clark wanted to get the other segmentation violations nailed
down as well, and suggested a new set of patches. Which didn't work on
Windows, and so the set was refined.

Dominic Dunlop reported perls 5.8.0 through 5.8.7 on Mac OS/X was
looking good, albeit with minor unrelated warnings. Steve Hay reported
success on Windows for 5.8.0, .2, .3 and .7. Nicholas published the patches
on CPAN.

  http://xrl.us/jbwc

Gisle Aas modified the way C<sprintf> obtains indexes and widths from the
format string to check for overflows. As a result numbers larger than
C<IV_MAX+1> (already ridiculously large on 32 bit hardware) can no longer
be used directly to specify a width, but as a) such values are probably
not used in practice and b) there are still indirect means of specifying
Very Large Widths (such as C<%*d>), it's not much of a loss.

  http://xrl.us/jbwd

=head2 More on funny file names

Last week, Craig Berry pointed out an annoyance with C<Pod::Simple>: its
test suite contains directories with names such as F<lib/Pod/Simple/t/test^lib>.
This is a hassle on VMS, because circumflex is not a legal character for a
filename, and he hoped that the directories could be renamed by changing the
circumflex to an underscore.

This week, John E. Malmberg pointed out other problems of filename
portability. Nicholas Clark reported that the directories had been renamed
to something sensible, but was now struggling with trying to get Perforce
to delete the now-empty C<troublesomely^named^directories>. Rafael came to
the rescue with the correct incantation.

  http://xrl.us/jbwe

=head2 C<strict 'refs'> doesn't apply inside C<defined>

Nicholas Clark noticed that the following snippet produced no
error:

  use strict;
  $a = "Not documented"; print defined @$a;
  # prints nothing, no error message
  $a = "Not documented"; print defined %$a;
  # prints nothing, no error message

... which is certainly a bug, and was worried that production code
might be relying on this misbehaviour. Since applying C<defined>
to arrays or hashes is vaguely deprecated, Rafael Garcia-Suarez
thought that it wasn't very important, and probably some odd side-effect
of the optimiser. Robin Houston came to the heart of the problem by
showing that that C<defined()> doesn't autovivify stash entries when
used via a symbolic reference:

   % perl -le '$n="z"; %$n; print(exists $::{$n} ?  "yes" : "no")'
   yes

   % perl -le '$n="z"; defined%$n; print(exists $::{$n} ? "yes" : "no")'
   no

... and also showed where in the source this was happening.

  http://xrl.us/jbwf

Rafael Garcia-Suarez noticed that all the internal datatypes exhibit
similar behaviour, but when he patched the necessary functions to
fix it up an odd assortment of tests began to fail. One of the more
icky cases was C<DBM_Filter>, with the snippet:

  C<if (!defined %{"${class}::"})>

Rafael want to at least fix up C<defined($$foo)>, but Robin was doubtful,
thinking that there's probably code Out There that relies on this
behaviour. And we got back to the comment in C<Perl_ck_defined()> that
has a warning comment about not breaking C<Tk> (This issue has been
hovering in the fringes of a number of threads in the past few months).

Nicholas then posted a particularly brilliant analysis of the problem.
It's well worth reading if you want to get a feel for what goes on in
perl's guts

  http://xrl.us/jbwg

It comes down to the fact that people are not so much trying to see
whether hashes (or. more precisely, stashes -- symbol tables hashes)
are defined I<per se>, but rather they are trying to determine what
packages have been loaded below the current package (that is, C<A::B>
wants to know if C<A::B::C> or C<A::B::D> are loaded. In the current
state of affairs, just I<thinking> about C<A::B::C> makes it spring
into life. So Rafael applied change #26370 to tweak the lexer to make
it all work again.

  http://xrl.us/jbwh

=head2 C<sprintf> of version objects

Gisle Aas filed bug #37897 regarding how C<sprintf> deals with version
objects, as part of the fallout from the C<webmin>/C<syslog> debacle.
John Peacock was at a bit of a loss as to where to start looking, and
said that C<sv_vcatpvfn()> was an example of overloaded operation gone
wrong. After mulling over the problem for a while, John came up with
a simpler approach that Gisle liked. So John went ahead an implemented
it. Gisle came back with a couple of suggestions to tighten it up.

H.Merijn Brand came up with a good test case:

  # all on one line
  ($_=sprintf"%vx\n",$^V)=~s^\d\d.3\d.2^Just \
  Anoth^;s$.3..2$r P$;s;.3.;rl Hacker,;;print

At the end of the thread, John reminded us about far more than we ever
wanted to know about version objects.

  http://xrl.us/jbwi

=head2 C<Pod::Man> creates empty man pages

Randal L. Schwartz wrote in to say that C<podlators-2.0> broke an interface
assumption (a parser object could not be reused) which caused a number of
things (heavy lifters like C<pod2man>, C<ExtUtils::MakeMaker:MM> and
C<Module::Build>) to fail. Russ Allbery said that C<pod2man> was fixed in
the C<podlators> distribution, but the main reason is C<Pod::Simple> objects
are single use once only. The new maintainer is interested in resolving the
issue, but the solution is not simple.

Ken Williams was ready to patch C<Module::Build>, but pointed out that if
someone was using C<M::B> or C<EU::MM> and after upgrading C<Pod::Man>
noticed that their man pages stopped working, then their first reflex
would be to see about seeing what was wrong with C<Pod::Man>. It might
not be obvious that the correct fix would be to upgrade C<M::B> or
C<EU::MM>. So at some point in time C<Pod::Man> does need to do The
Right Thing.

  http://xrl.us/jbwj

=head2 Calling perl's guts simultaneously from many threads

Every once in a while, someone pops into p5p with a very (on the surface)
simple question that turns out to be fiendishly complex. Mark Glines
won this week's award for the best question.

It turns out that Mark has written a Perl XS wrapper for the Fuse project.

  http://fuse.sf.net/

Fuse, as I understand it from Perl's perspective, is that you just
C<use Fuse> and you create a filesystem whose entries can be mapped
to Perl routines.  The Perl interface, until now, has been a
single-threaded implementation (mainly because it's been around
since 5.6.1). Mark recently looked at 5.8's thread support and
decided it looked much better, and set about investigating how to
make a multiple-threaded version of Fuse. He had a number of
questions.

Nick Ing-Simmons dived in with a number of detailed responses to
Mark's questions, explaining how perl's threads behave. In fact,
with a bit of help from Nick and Yitzchak Scott-Thoennes, Mark was
well on his way to getting it all work quite well.

  http://xrl.us/jbwk

=head2 The Ponie Pump(?:king|queen) chair is up for grabs

Two and a half years ago, Fotango began sponsoring the Perl 6
development effort, in the shape of Ponie, or an implementation of
Perl 5 on Parrot.  Nicholas worked on the project during his stay
at Fotango, but he's now moved on, and Ponie is looking for a new
manager. If you're interested, drop Nick and/or Jesse a line at
C<ponie-pumpking@perl.org>.

  http://xrl.us/jbwm

=head2 Eliminating null macros.

Nicholas wondered whether it would be worth reducing the use of macros
by changing things like C<Nullsv> to C<(SV*)0>, the reason being that
it's three things that people have to remember, and three things that
newcomers have to learn.

Andy Lester thought it might be better to replace the C<Null[a-z]+>
variants with C<NULL>. Jan Dubois remembered a case where it does
matter: when using C<vararg>-style functions, H.Merijn pointed out
that the explicit casts gives the compiler something bare C<NULL>s
don't: hints about alignment. Specifically, on some architectures
(ok, HP) the following is safe:

  long l; *((char *)&l) = 'a';

but

  char a[160]; *((long *)a) = 100L;

may result in phase-of-the-moon errors. Nicholas applied a couple of
experimental patches to see what it would look like.

  http://xrl.us/jbwn

=head2 PeekMessage() call in win32\win32.c win32_async_check fixed

Following on from last week's thread about C<alarm()> on Win32,
Jan checked in some code to address the problems. Rafael had a bit
of trouble with the associated test suite, and it was all sorted out
in the end

  http://xrl.us/jbwo

=head2 Change 26165 broke F<ext/threads/t/stress_re.t> test on Win32

Steve Hay observed that somewhere between changes 26150 and 26185,
changes to F<sv.c> caused the above test file to fail. After doing
a binary search among those change, he pinned the problem on change
26165, but couldn't see what in the patch was causing the problem.

Nicholas and Steve went over the parts of 26165 and began to apply
them individually, looking for mistakes. It turned out to be a
trailing comma at the end of a very heavily-casted subtraction.

After a lot of patient untangling of the initial patch, Nicholas
got it all sorted out. A fascinating case of debugging by mail. All
fixed up in 26378.

  http://xrl.us/jbwp

=head2 Reducing ithreads overhead

Brendan O'Dea told of how Debian now builds a threaded perl by
default, and one of the biggest complaints is the slowdown that
that induces, and worse, segfaults. A couple of ideas where
discussed, but no firm conclusions were made.

  http://xrl.us/jbwq

=head2 Smart match is done

Robin Houston wrapped up his work on the new smart match operator,
the C<~~> operator from Perl 6. The patch was over 100 kilobytes.
Nicholas carefully applied two parts of it, that corrected a
couple of spelling errors in comments. which tickled Robin no end.

After having looked more carefully at the patch, Nicholas
decomposed into six discrete components. Rafael
was a bit dubious about the C<use feature> approach to implementing
smart match (and switch, and say)... all of which are provided
by this patch. He thought it a pity that a pragma was required
to get at recent coolness added to the language, but backwards
compatibility being what it was, that it was the best way forward.

Yves Orton ironed a few kinks out the patch to get it running
cleanly under threads and Windows.

  http://xrl.us/jbwr

Robin later followed up with another version of the patch
incorporating Yves's changes and a tweaked version of smart
match semantics (subject to more possible semantic changes when
Larry and/or Damian touch base). Applied by Rafael as change 26400
and a tweak in 26416.

  http://xrl.us/jbws

=head2 Slimming down C<constant>s

Nicholas Clark noted that, despite optimisations and inlining,
constants take up a lot of memory:

  $ perl -MDevel::Size=size -le 'sub c () {3}; print size(\&c)'
  434

... and wondered whether there was a viable way of reducing their
size. One approach would be to store the scalar value directly,
but that would require some collusion between the optimiser and
the C<pp_entersub> opcode. Over seven years ago, Ilya Zakharevich
produced a patch to bring the cost of a subroutine declaration
from 500 bytes down to 100 (change 965), one possibly non-documented
side effect of which is:

  $ perl -lwe 'sub foo {}; sub bar; sub baz ($); \
    print "($_)" foreach $::{foo}, $::{bar}, $::{baz}'
  (*main::foo)
  (-1)
  ($)

Nicholas wondered whether it would be worth replacing this mechanism
by another whereby something else than a typeglob could appear in
symbol tables and could be used for storing constants. For modules
sych as C<Socket> and C<Fcntl> that implement constants internally,
it would become possible to generate true inlineable constants at
require time, rather than at run time.

The main stumbling block is that as a constant is secretly prototyped
as C<()> behind the scenes, the trick is figure out how to distinguish
between a true prototyped routine and a constant value.

After some more legwork, Nicholas discovered that C<pp_entersub>
can be fed just about any old thing, which would therefore require
a non-trivial amount of cooperation from higher-level ops. And the
worst of it is that as a general rule, most constant subs are never
actually called in any particular program.

The new scheme that Nicholas came up with is quite clever. Now, when
a reference to a constant value is stored in the symbol table, like

  $foo::{bar} = \3;

It stays that way (occupying only as much space as a reference) until
it gets called upon. At that point, it springs into C<sub foo::bar () {3}>
and can be inlined as needed. What is more, any constant-building
mechanism that looks like this get the optimisation for free. But
wait! there's more!  The first time Nicholas took the new code for
a test drive, he picked up an error (a missing semi-colon in
C<Tie::File>).

Benchmarking the new technique revealed that 1% less memory is
consumed when Fcntl is C<require>d and a massive 12% less when
C<use>d. And all its constants are now inlined. The C<POSIX> shows
even better improvements (which will put to rest the meme about
writing C<use POSIX ()> to avoid importing the universe). Bonus!

Even better still, the memory saved is that much less memory
needed to be cloned when threads are created. A truly momentous
change.

  http://xrl.us/jbwt

Later on, Nicholas figured that it should be possible to teach
C<Devel::Peek> how to dump out the value of constant subroutines,
and committed a patch (26404) to do just that. Dave Mitchell
liked the output.

  http://xrl.us/jbwu

=head2 C<//g> loops infinitely on tainted data

Steve Peters revived an old bug (#8262) where Kirrelly "Skud"
Roberts noticed that the follow snippet went into an infinite
loop when tainting is active

  while($ENV{LANG} =~ m/(.)/g ) {
    print "saw '$1'\n";
  }

Sadahiro Tomoyuki noticed that it occurs with certain, but not
all, tainted values. For instance C<$ARGV[0]> loops, but its
copy C<$copy = shift> does not. Mike Guy reasoned that bad magic
was causing the trouble, no doubt some interaction between
magic and taint causing C<pos()> to be reset.

This last clue was sufficient for the light-bulb to go off over
Dave Mitchell's head, and create a patch that fixes the problem.

  http://xrl.us/jbwv

=head2 Perl is 18 years old

Dave Mitchell noted that Perl is now old enough to drink hard liquor,
vote and join the army. Randal Schwartz remarked that that's a long time to
be printing "Hello, world". Joshua Juran recommended that Randal purchase
a book called, um, "Learning Perl", currently in its third edition.
C<brian d foy> suggested that Joshua buy a new copy, since it's now
in its fourth edition.

  http://xrl.us/jbww

=head2 Plugins for Lint

Joshua ben Jore sent in a patch against blead to teach C<B::Lint>
to accept plugins. The particular scratch he wanted to itch was the
ability to check for unchecked system calls and non-constant sprintf
formats.  Rafael wondered whether Joshua planned to backport the
current C<B::Lint> checks as plugins in the new regime.  Joshua
wasn't convinced of the value in doing so, to which Hugo van der
Sanden pointed out that it would provide a good set of examples to
show how future plugin authors could write their own. But as the
plugin mechanism has a certain overhead, the cost would be too great
to convert everything over.

  http://xrl.us/jbwx

=head2 Making the C<sort> pragma lexically scoped

Robin Houston thought that the C<use sort> pragma (as in
C<use sort '_quicksort'>, C<use sort _'mergesort'>) should be
lexically scoped. And having a couple of moments to spare after
having written C<switch> and other goodies, whipped up a patch
to do just that. As a result he had to rewrite part of the test
suite which was relying on the previous behaviour, but that no-one
minded that.

Nicholas did raise a concern about pragmata namespaces, which
Robin addressed in a followup patch. All applied by Rafael.

  http://xrl.us/jbwy

Robin also supplied a patch to test for C<%^H> (the hints hash)
being propagated into C<eval>.

  http://xrl.us/jbwz

=head2 Is C<perlivp> too fussy?

Gisle Aas doesn't like the way C<perlivp> (Perl Installation
Verification Procedure) moans about incorrectly installed C<*.ph>
files, which isn't really a problem under ActiveState Perl,
and supplied a patch to silence these warnings.

Rafael noted that C<perlivp> doesn't play nicely in this day and
age of package-managed operating systems, and that Mandriva doesn't
bother distributing it. Gisle thought that another solution would
be to get rid of it altogether. Michael Cummings (who does Perl
on Gentoo) voted for either removing it, or at least updating it
so that it at least prints out a description of each test as it
runs.

  http://xrl.us/jbw2

=head2 Should C<err> be a feature?

Up until now, C<err> has been implemented as a weak keyword, which
in a nutshell means that it operates as a keyword only if a subroutine
of the same name has not been declared previously. Now that Robin
has introduced the C<feature> pragma, he wondered whether it would
not make more sense to recast C<err> as a feature.

In case you haven't been following Perl 6 too closely, C<err> is to
C<//> (defined or) as C<and> is to C<&&>. Rafael quite rightly pointed
out that since C<//> isn't a feature, (because it doesn't clash with
anything apart from an obscure regexp construct) it seems odd to
require C<err> to be featured. The crux of the matter is the trade-off
between backwards compatibility and using new, ah, features.

Also proposed was the idea of C<use feature ':5.9.3'>, C<use feature ':5.10'>
and C<use feature ':all'> as ways of getting everything new that the
interpreter has to offer, with possibly various degrees of pain inflicted
on getting your code to compile.

Sébastien Asperghis-Tramoni fired up his own private gonzui search
tool, and discovered that 69 distributions on CPAN currently define
C<sub err>.

Hot on the heels was the need for
a command line switch that would have the same effect, in order to
C<err>, C<say> or smart match in a one-liner. Since the best candidate
(C<-f>) has recently been used for another purpose, Robin posted the
list of unused command-line switches

  b E g G H j J k K L N o O q Q r R y Y z Z

... and wondered which one would be the best for this purpose. Abigail
suggested C<-6> only not really. More interesting was Abigail's idea
to just enable the whole lot when C<-e> is used, since in a one-liner it
would be highly doubtful that C<err> ever needs to be diambiguated, or
else C<-e> uses all features, and C<-E> uses none.

Then it started to get really silly, with Tels suggesting to use æ
(ae ligature).

  http://xrl.us/jbw3

In a followup post, Robin produced a patch that does the reverse of
Abigail's sensible idea: that is, C<-E> is like C<-e> with the
addition of all features.

=head2 Time to release 5.9.3?

After the discussion featuring C<err>, Rafael thought that with the
addition of all these new shiny, erm, features, it must be time to
roll out a new version of bleadperl to give it some wider exposure.
Some things that need to be done are: get feedback from Larry and
Damian on smart match, better (read: more) tests for modules like
C<DBI> and C<Tk> and implementing C<feature 'err'>.

Robin promised to wrap up the documentation for the work he's done
so far, on the understanding that semantics may change from here to
5.10, and Rafael said that it might be nice to try for 1/1/2006 as
a release date. Robin checked in some documentation for switch
and smart match a few days later.

  http://xrl.us/jbw4

A long discussion followed revolving around C<err>, and whether it
could be possible to promote it to a full keyword. Rafael disliked
the idea, because it would introduce source-level incompatibilities,

Gisle proposed cutting the Gordian knot by just simply removing
the C<err> keyword altogether. H.Merijn said that this would
remove a certain amount of orthogonality from C<||>/C<or> and
C<&&>/C<and>. Yves thought that C<err> was a pretty dumb name, and
put forward C<dor> as an alternative. Randy W. Sims concurred,
and thought that C<default> would be better than C<err>. But as
it comes from Perl 6, it appears we don't have that luxury.

Yves's objection is that C<err> sounds too much like error, as in
Danger! Danger!, when it really means "I half expect this to not
work, but that's ok. Another valid argument was that the C<err>
object in Visual Basic is the way you throw errors, so VB refugees
are going to have a hard time unlearning it in Perl.

To summarise: just about everyone thinks that C<err> sucks, but
no-one can think of anything better.

The summariser thinks that since the purpose of the operator is
to let you try out something, and if that doesn't work, get something
else, then it should be called the Jagger-Richards operator, because
you can't always get what you want, but you might find you get what
you need.

Rafael wondered whether, with Robin's implementation of switch in
the interpreter, whether it would be possible to fast-track the
deprecation of C<Switch.pm>. Robin pointed out that the semantics
of his switch are not quite the same as Damians source filter
switch. In the end, though, since 21 CPAN modules (again thanks
to a search from Sébastien's) already use Switch, it'll stay.

  http://xrl.us/jbw5

=head2 Adding feature bundles and featuring C<err>

After having done six Impossible Things before breakfast, Robin
finished up with a patch to implement feature bundles, as discussed
above.

  http://xrl.us/jbw6

=head2 Should occurences of C<I32> be replaced with C<IV> or C<STRLEN>?

After having started to look at the array index issue, Jan Dubois
noted that there are many other cases where signed/unsigned types
are used inconsistently.

Worse, in the case of 64-bit builds, some temporary copies of things
get shoved into hard-coded 32-bit variables, which admits the possibility
of nasty wrap-around errors.

Rafael wondered what impact the proposed change would have on the
recompilation of XS modules, and other checks that might cause
slowdowns.

  http://xrl.us/jbw7

=head2 New Modules

Ken Williams uploaded a beta C<PathTools> (3.14_02). This incorporates
the "stop at first directory in PATH" fix that was giving Nick
Ing-Simmons grief a few weeks ago. If all goes well, a 3.15 will be out
shortly.

=head2 Perl5 Bug Summary

Steve Peters closed out at least two bugs that I was paying attention to,
7567 and 23907. And 23357 and 27319 as well.

Robert Spier noted that in the past seven weeks, all bugs have been replied
to. 1511 open tickets as of December 19.

  http://xrl.us/jbw8

  The list
  http://rt.perl.org/rt3/NoAuth/perl5/Overview.html

=head2 In Brief

B<Sorting within a sort does not set C<$a>, C<$b>> was filed as bug #36430
back in June 2005. Robin (Houston, I suppose, the RT interface isn't clear
on the matter) poked at it in late October. Steve Peters applied a change
to fix it, only to realise that it had already been fixed by change #25953.

  http://xrl.us/jbw9

Jarkko Hietaniemi followed up on his B<C<valgrind> findings from last
month> and October with a short snippet that demonstrates ampersandy
leakage:

  s/a//e;
  print eval '$&';

  http://xrl.us/jbxa

A B<problem using C<local> with C<threads::shared>> (bug 37671) inched
forward a bit closer to resolution when Steve Peters realised that a
more restrictive approach was needed when dealing with magic and
Yitzchak agreed with the idea.

  http://xrl.us/jbxb

Jim Cromie refined his B<work on C<arenaroot>s>.

  http://xrl.us/jbxc

Thanks to last week's summary, Andy Lester realised that he had let
a message from Jim slip, and answered Jim's questions.

  http://xrl.us/jbxd

Vadim Konovalov noted that B<C<s{}{goto uncool;uncool:;}e> produces
the error C<Can't find label uncool at -e line 1>>, but that
C<s{}{do{goto uncool if 1;uncool:;}}e> (wrapping the inner
statement in a C<do> block) works. After a moment of astonished
silence, Chip Salzenberg said that this was perhaps the most
evil thing he'd ever seen.

  http://xrl.us/jbxe

Rafael discovered that the C<INSTALLSCRIPT> doesn't follow
changes to INSTALLDIR and that it's probably a bug. No-one
complained about possible backwards compatibility breakage,
but for the time being things are staying as they are.

  http://xrl.us/jbxf

Andy Lester announced B<the C<Sys::Syslog> and C<sprintf> fixes>
on the Perl foundation blog:

  http://xrl.us/jbxg
  http://news.perlfoundation.org/2005/12/updated_perl_modules_alleviate.html

Jerry D. Hedden posted bug #37946 concerning B<C<refaddr>s of C<threads::shared>
variables>. Rather than staying constant, it flip-flops between two addresses.
Nicholas Clark explained why it was so. Dave Mitchell scuffed his toe, looking
for tuits.

  http://xrl.us/jbxh

See also his other bug, #37919

  http://xrl.us/jbxi

Yves Orton supplied a patch to B<fix the script embedded in patchlevel.h>
in order to make it  work on Windows.

  http://xrl.us/jbxj

Andrew Savige started B<tracking down perl memory leaks with C<valgrind>>
and noticed a leak with constant subs with prototypes and asked
for some tips on how to proceed. Andrew, meet Jarkko. Jarkko, meet Andrew.

  http://xrl.us/jbxk

Nicholas looked at how B<C<Perl_yylex> tokenises version strings>
and couldn't see how a certain piece of code should be reached.
Robin Houston supplied a one-liner to show how it could, and Nicholas
thanked him for the insight, noting that there now remained only
3000-odd lines of similarly incomprehensible code.

  http://xrl.us/jbxm

=head2 About this summary

This summary was written by David Landgren. Sorry about the delay, Santa ate
all my tuits. No doubt Adriano will do a much better job next week. This
summary took me far too long to write, and in the interest of matrimonial
harmony, hasn't had the care it deserves applied, so the quotient of
typos, wordos and other oddities will probably be higher than usual.

Information concerning bugs referenced in this summary (as #nnnnn)
may be viewed at http://rt.perl.org/rt3/Ticket/Display.html?id=nnnnn

Information concerning patches to maint or blead referenced in
this summary (as #nnnnn) may be viewed at
http://public.activestate.com/cgi-bin/perlbrowse?patch=nnnnn

If you want a bookmarklet approach to viewing bugs and change reports,
there are a couple of bookmarklets that you might find useful on
my page of Perl stuff:

  http://www.landgren.net/perl/

Weekly summaries are published on F<http://use.perl.org/> and posted
on a mailing list, (subscription: F<perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org>).
The archive is at F<http://dev.perl.org/perl5/list-summaries/>.
Corrections and comments are welcome.

If you found this summary useful or enjoyable, please consider
contributing to the Perl Foundation to help support the development
of Perl.
