=head1 This Week on perl5-porters - 10-16 October 2005

The porters mailing list was crowded with recurrent
themes on multiple threads this week. 
Paul Marquess led a lot of action on C<Compress::Zlib> front. 
Much interaction and many fixes for latent
and old issues.


=head2 C<Compress::Zlib>


This week has seen lots of action in C<Compress::Zlib> front,
led by Paul Marquess. At least six threads were directly
related to the compression module.

After a report on a test failure on Cygwin, Paul Marquess
kept his promise to make F<t/14gzopen.t> more robust.
And then Paul attacked utf8 errors reported by recent
smokes. And there was also a patch to silence warnings
on AIX.

    The patches
    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-10/msg00225.html

The utf8 errors survived the first approach and prompted
for more investigation. Dominic Dunlop reported Mac OS X were
quite happy with all tests succeeding. H.Merijn Brand remembered
the tricky part was that, while passing manual runs, 
failures were showing up while the test suite run from a smoke.
Paul traced the trouble to issues with the binmode treatment
for filehandles in a number of tests: it was hard for making
Linux, Sun, AIX, Win32, HP-UX, Mac OS X satisfied at the
same time.

    UTF-8 errors are back
    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-10/msg00274.html
    Fighting UTF-8 smokes
    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-10/msg00336.html

Steve Hay noticed bleadperl smokes on Win32 have been
failing in test F<09gziphdr.t> and crashing perl.
Paul has agreed that it looked like a memory corruption
issue and produced a patch so that Win32
smokes can resume normally again.

    Steve Hay reports
    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-10/msg00271.html
    Paul Marquess nails things down
    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-10/msg00420.html

There were also a thread involving an issue about C<Compress::Zlib> Makefile.PL 
in perl core, driven by Yitzchak Scott-Thoennes and E.Merijn Brand, which
sorted out some build details. In L</Perl on Symbian>, you read about
Jarkko's working out C::Z in the Symbian port, where running tests in the device
still looks like a dream. C<Compress::Zlib> 2.000_05 is reaching the high
time in blead.

    C::Z Makefile.PL revised for Cygwin
    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-10/msg00215.html

=head2 Perl on Cygwin


Yitzchak Scott-Thoennes found some segfaults
in recent main builds on Cygwin. Together
with Nicholas Clark, they traced the issue
down to a destruction ordering bug, which
could affect other platforms and squashed it.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-10/msg00200.html

H.Merijn Brand reported that after the PERL_CORE
patch, Cygwin does not dump core on blead
anymore, failing two tests, one at C<Compress::Zlib>
and other with POSIX signals. Paul Marquess 
pointed the finger to issues with F<14gzopen.t> and prepared
a patch to make it more robust (see L</Compress::Zlib>). Yitzchak
Scott-Thoennes reported the F<sigaction> failure
went away with the last Cygwin improvements.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-10/msg00220.html

Steve Peters reported 
bugs #36665 ("delete $ENV{FOO} leaves $FOO visible 
in subprocesses on Cygwin Perl") and #30952 ("qx() problems 
with local environment variables on Cygwin/Perl 5.8.2")
had to do with Perl's handling of environment variables
when compiled with -DPERL_USE_SAFE_PUTENV. This was fixed
in bleadperl with change #25737. (Read more on L</Environmental Recovery>.)

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-10/msg00291.html
    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-10/msg00292.html

=head2 Spaces in C<-F> Switch


Steve Peters followed on the bug report #37366 by John Krahn.
The issue is that a space cannot be used in patterns
supplied as arguments to the C<-F> switch.
Rafael Garcia-Suarez remembered it's a feature to make
C<-F> work on C<#!> lines, now documented in blead. Rick
Delaney thought this limitation could be lifted in the case
when implicit delimiters were given and implemented it.
Rafael pointed problems because you can't rely on doing
the argument splitting yourself, something that "helpful
kernels" could do for you. David Landgren showed Rick
how FreeBSD could be more helpful than Linux
and that perl was not in fault wrt awk. David also 
remembered you can always use C<"\x20"> instead of spaces
in patterns.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-10/msg00372.html

=head2 Perl on Symbian


Jarkko Hietaniemi posted updates for Symbian on blead.
Among the concerned issues, some fixes for C<Compress::Zlib>
allowed the DLL to build and link successfully.
Paul Marquess noted the changes to the zlib source. 
Jarkko explained the changes have to do
with the fact that a DLL in Symbian cannot have writable data.
After a while, Paul announced Jarkko's patch
was accepted to enter into the official zlib source.
Another new feature of the Symbian port 0.2.0 is
the introduction of another way of starting a Perl
app in Series 60, packaging scripts and modules into
SIS files.

    Symbian on blead patch
    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-10/msg00234.html
    The "sisify.pl" patch
    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-10/msg00344.html

=head2 C<malloc_wrap>, the Default?


Alan Burlison questioned why C<malloc_wrap> had
become the default behavior and if the decision
had to do with performance. Yitzchak Scott-Thoennes explained
the goal of C<malloc_wrap> is to prevent situations
where an overflow on multiplication causes a different
amount of memory to be allocated. There ensued
some discussion on playing whack-a-mole with compilers:
Alan were seeing too much warnings with Forte compilers
and Dave Mitchel said the macro was recently hacked
to avoid warnings on gcc.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-10/msg00249.html

=head2 New Core Modules Release


Without much ado, Paul Marquess brought a patch
to sync blead and CPAN with respect to C<DB_File> 1.1812.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-10/msg00204.html

Sébastien Aperghis-Tramonis also announced
a patch to bring C<XSLoader> to version 0.06.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-10/msg00488.html

=head2 C<Module::Build> Applies for Core


Ken Williams announced the release of C<Module::Build> 0.27_03,
which is the last major feature-adding beta release 
before 0.28. Ken asked if it's not time for this version
to get pulled into the core. Warnocked by now.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-10/msg00258.html

=head2 Not So Short


Gisle Aas noticed that C<Win32::GetShortPathName()> 
does not return shorter results (those ugly
F<SHORTN~2>) all the time
and posted a patch to update the documentation.
While on this, he also fixed F<Test/Harness/Straps.pm>
which relied on this misleading functionality.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-10/msg00230.html

=head2 Postponed subregexes and groups


Abigail opened RT ticket #37407 to tell about
a malfunction of the postponed regex construction
C</(??{"(PAT)"})/>. The C<$1> variable is not
correctly set. Rick Delaney regretted the matched
groups cannot be got and suggested documentation
should change. On the other hand, the construction
provides the only way to get reusable self-contained
regexps with backreferences, which is pretty
important to Rick and also Rafael Garcia-Suarez.
Jeff 'japhy' Pinyan, Yitzchak Scott-Thoennes and
Dave Mitchell entered this mind-bending discussion.
A part of the solution for the raised issues rests 
in Dave Mitchell's hands and his promised re_eval
rewrite - may Duke Nukem Forever be soon released.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-10/msg00269.html

=head2 Environmental Recovery


Discussion continued this week on the Perl's handling
of environment variables which was triggered by 
a problem seen at Solaris 10. And that's a long long
continuation, regarding POSIX interfaces, probes,
Solaris, AIX, etc.

    Summarized here
    http://dev.perl.org/perl5/list-summaries/2005/20051003.html#Environmental_damage_on_Solaris_10
    Continued this week
    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-10/msg00238.html

A new thread started (with subject "environ fixup")
after the probe for C<unsetenv()> was added by E.Merijn
Brand. Alan Burlison had been working out how to make
use of the new probe and Rafael Garcia-Suarez
gave pointers. It might as well impact
Symbian, EPOC and Cygwin. And it did.
At least, Cygwin
got rid of some oddities in environment handling
after this fruitful discussion. (Read more at L</Perl on Cygwin>.)

    The new thread
    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-10/msg00283.html

=head2 Perl5 Bug Summary

The bug count at the beginning of this week
was 1519. An instant overview of the
open tickets can be seen at any time in the 
F<rt.perl.org> link below.

    RT in Oct 10 13:00, courtesy of Robert Spier
    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-10/msg00257.html
    Perl RT just now
    http://rt.perl.org/rt3/NoAuth/perl5/Overview.html

=head2 In Brief


B<Odd Behavior in Closures> In RT ticket #37396, Mathieu observed
some weird problems with lexical bindings while mixing blocks,
named subroutines and closures. Dave Mitchell remembered these
issues had been fixed in the development branch of perl, which
will eventually appear in the stable release 5.10. Yitzchak
Scott-Thoennes sketched some workarounds to prevent the problems.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-10/msg00207.html


B< Faster C<++/--> for Integers >
Postfix C<++>/C<--> in void contexts are optimized
to prefix C<++>/C<-->, because the later is known
to be faster. Hugo van der Sanden posted a patch
to extend the special treatment even for integers,
where the same rationale is also valid.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-10/msg00457.html


B<Indexing perl Docs>
Carrying on with the plan to index the most of perl POD files,
Ivan Tubert-Brohman, with contributions by Simon Taylor,
sent a patch adding C<< X<> >> index entries
to a number of Perl documents (like F<perldata>, 
F<perlfunc>, and
so on). A total of new 1999 index entries
applied to blead. 

    Ivan's calling summarized
    http://dev.perl.org/perl5/list-summaries/2005/20050915.html#Pod_Indexing_Project_Status_and_Plan
    Ivan and the 1999 new entries
    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-10/msg00368.html


B<Array Indexing with a Ref>
Bug #37427 was open by "daniel_lo" to report that
the incorrect indexing of an array with a reference

    perl -e '$a=1; print $stack->[\$a]->[0];'

would produce an "Out of memory" error.
Rick Delaney noticed there is a warning for this
if he had tried with C<-w>. Dave Mitchel dismissed the bug: 
a ref in numeric context gives the address of the
referent. So the code may be actually trying to create an extremely
large array. 

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-10/msg00397.html

B<Using the DOR> 
Last week had seen a thread on the subject of whether symbol tables
C<%...::> should be expected to be defined or not (as summarized).
David Nicol persisted on his suggestion to recognize C<if(defined)>
and parse that to a construction involving the brand new operator
C<op_DOR>, which could arguably be a concise solution.
However cool, David got warnocked.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-10/msg00254.html

B<To Awk or Not To Awk> 
Xavier Noria posted a doc patch for an improved explanation of
C<$,> and C<$\>. Michael Schwern went further with Xavier's
approach to not add references to awk, suggesting these awk
jargons should be dumped entirely, as folks usually do not read perl
documentation anymore to know how emulate awk behavior.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-10/msg00471.html

B< C<%INC> and Forward Slashes >
Jan Dubois brought in a patch to make sure the I<keys> in C<%INC>
always use forward slashes. That fixed those ugly "subroutine
foo redefined" warnings on Windows. Yitzchak Scott-Thoennes
had some questions whether that works in old perls on classic Mac OS,
for which Jan Dubois thinks the general answer is yes.
As a contumacious Windows user, I salute Jan Dubois
for leaving Win32 free of those (dozens of) annoying warnings
each time C<cpan> is run.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-10/msg00504.html

=head2 About this summary

This summary was written by Adriano Ferreira.
Fortunately, shorter than the last one he wrote. 

Information concerning bugs referenced in this summary (as #nnnnn)
may be viewed at http://rt.perl.org/rt3/Ticket/Display.html?id=nnnnn

Information concerning patches to maint or blead referenced in
this summary (as #nnnnn) may be viewed at
http://public.activestate.com/cgi-bin/perlbrowse?patch=nnnnn

Weekly summaries are published on F<http://use.perl.org/> and posted
on a mailing list, (subscription: F<perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org>).
The archive is at F<http://dev.perl.org/perl5/list-summaries/>.
Corrections and comments are welcome.

If you found this summary useful or enjoyable, please consider
contributing to the Perl Foundation to help support the development
of Perl.


