=head1 This Week on perl5-porters - 24-30 October 2005

Mathoms, fixes, hobbits, speedups, all of them together
advancing the development of Perl.


=head2 A I<maint> Snapshot


Nicholas Clark rolled out a maint snapshot towards 5.8.8.
He called for reports of success and failure while
stuff integration from blead to maint goes on.
In the followups,
OS X Tiger and Mandriva Linux seemed to be quite happy
with the current state of maint.
Nicholas' plan hopes to see another snapshot about
a week later and probably 5.8.8 RC1 one week after
this. 

    Nicholas' announcement
    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-10/msg00740.html
    The snapshot
    http://opensource.fotango.com/~nclark/perl-25817.tar.bz2



=head2 Cut-and-Paste Findings


Jarkko Hietaniemi posted the findings of cut-and-paste
code on blead@25827. That triggered a discussion on how
to deal with repeated code, why it is worthy and
when it could be desirable. 

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-10/msg00748.html


=head2 Getting C<sort()> Right

Robin Houston had no rest this week fighting
battles with recursive sorts and issues on
fiddling with active subs.


Robin started wondering about the rationale
behind the "Can't redefine active sort sub" thing and
found a number of bugs in the way. These bugs
were related to oversights in doing multiple calls
to subroutines and affected C<sort()> as well
C<List::Util>. To solve the issue, Robin thought
of a set of macros *MULTICALL* for repeatedly
calling the same sub and intented to make easier
to get right code like the C<sort> implementation.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-10/msg00791.html


Robin showed yet another subtle bug when you
call C<sort()> with a sort sub that's already active.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-10/msg00820.html


Ben Tilly, the requestor of RT ticket #36430, explained
Robin what exactly made the ticket issue unlike
the one of bug #7063.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-10/msg00828.html


Then, Robin prepared drafts of his so-called sort/multicall
patch. Yitzchak Scott-Thoennes prodded for tests and Graham Barr
(the maintainer of C<List::Util>) asked for description
of what really changes and how compatibility may be preserved/restored.

    First draft
    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-10/msg00823.html
    Second draft
    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-10/msg00849.html
    Getting there
    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-10/msg00884.html


=head2 C<pp_push()> Gets Faster


Tassilo von Parseval stumbled at a comment at F<pp.c>
and found a good opportunity to speed up C<pp_push()>
for the case of pushing multiple elements. Yitzchak 
Scott-Thoennes had comments and suggestions that led
Tassilo to write a more effective patch, illustrated
by benchmarks hinted by H.Merijn Brand. Rafael applied it
as change #25854.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-10/msg00752.html

=head2 Mathoms Held Together


Back in June, Nicholas Clark suggested the name F<mathoms.c>,
for a file holding C functions still kept around for binary 
compatibility reasons. (For the record, mathoms will be yet another 
Tolkien's reference in Perl source code.) This week, Steve Peters 
made it happen with a patch
to create the new file and a configure switch to turn on/off
the inclusion of the file in the build. Ronald J. Kimball and
Philip M. Gollucci played the part of the ones who don't like the name.
Rafael Garcia-Suarez thought Steve's patch would break build on everything 
but Unix. Steve asked for pointers on what files would need editing
in other environments and, confronted with golden silence,
found those files and made what was necessary, applying change #25866.

    Nicholas coins the file name
    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-06/msg00077.html
    Steve Peters gets mathoms together
    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-10/msg00799.html



=head2 Ken and PerlIO


B< Panic with Multiple Encodings >
Ken Hirsch reported bug #37526 which shows
how using multiple encodings at once 
may cause panic (more exactly, 
C<"panic: sv_setpvn called with negative strlen">).

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-10/msg00813.html


B< Reconciled 3-arg Opens >
Ken Hirsch reported yet another problem with
PerlIO encoding layers. This time, in RT ticket #37533,
he noticed that three-arg opens seem to always
ignore default layer settings by the C<open> pragma.
Furthermore, he pointed an issue that Rafael Garcia-Suarez
considered a contradiction between
the C<open> pragma documentation and F<perlfunc>.
Rafael produced a patch to reconcile the 3-arg
opens with the C<open> pragma settings and suggested
to settle the C<perlfunc> behavior as the correct one.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-10/msg00822.html

=head2 Gory Quoted Constructs


Bas van Sisseren in bug #37527 reported the parser
was having trouble with regexes delimited with C<[]>
and backslashes. Jeff 'japhy' Pinyan elucidated the
gory details which Rafael Garcia-Suarez believed
to be documented in F<perlop>, although not very clearly.
Bas proceeded to patch C<B::Deparse> which he was using
when he met the problem.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-10/msg00814.html

=head2 Pre-loaded Perl executables


Joseph Thames exposed a maintenance issue at
his actual work environment using Perl, 
Apache, mod_perl and various CPAN modules
with very demanding requirements. He was 
looking for a scalable solution minimizing
configuration, preferably with native
executables and wondered if there was
a standard way of using early-bound
Perls rather than the dynamic traditional
way. Yitzchak Scott-Thoennes advised about the highly
experimental nature of C<B::C> or C<B::CC>
approaches and about C<PAR> as a candidate
for the job. He also referred Joseph could
reach a wider audience by asking at perlmonks.org.
John Peacock suggested him to also evaluate C<perl2exe>
in his context.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-10/msg00829.html



=head2 Fast C<IO::File> Once Again


Pratik noticed that a recent change at C<IO::File> introduced
a call to C<< File::Spec->rel2abs() >> which uses C<Cwd>
that in turn forks a new process to determine the working
directory. This led to a major performance hit. Gisle Aas
explained the change was due to fixing a failure in Windows
and soon found a way to fix the situation with a 3-arg
open instead of munging with file names. Steve Peters
applied and that made Pratik happy and eager to see
the fix in 5.8.x branch as well.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-10/msg00856.html


=head2 Multi-threaded C<IO::Socket>


Peter Millington had a multi-threaded application
and found some trouble when using C<IO::Socket> and
C<Net::FTP> in such environment. He asked whether
the corresponding objects are believed to be thread-safe
and explained how he worked around the issue with a change
to C<IO::Socket::Net::configure()>.
Rafael Garcia-Suarez confirmed there may be
problems with C<IO::Socket> and threads,
called for a patch in unified diff format
and greeted opinions on other points raised by Peter.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-10/msg00865.html




=head2 C<utime>'s Turn


In July, Gisle Aas set a trend on
taking advantage of the corresponding C C<fxxx()> functions
to implement builtins like C<chmod>, C<fchown>, and
C<fchdir>. This time, Yitzchak Scott-Thoennes
proposed to make C<utime> use C<futimes> where available.
Gisle Aas backed it up and waits for somebody
to add Configure probes for C<futimes>.


    Gisle's start
    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-07/msg00730.html
    Yitzchak's turn
    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-07/msg00730.html


=head2 Extending Left Bit-shifts


Tassilo von Parseval wondered whether perl could try to
use the biggest available native integer type for left
bit-shift operations. Adriano Ferreira believed perl would
better stick to its configure/build-time integer types
and C<bigint> pragma would be there
for arbitrary precision integer arithmetic. Tassilo
and Tels pointed the inconvenience of the performance
hit when using C<Math::BigInt>. Yitzchak Scott-Thoennes 
foresaw trouble in upgrading IV to NV types for 
integer-type operations like shifts.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-10/msg00881.html


=head2 John and VMS


B<VMS failure summary>
After a failure summary of blead on VMS
by John E. Malmberg, Rafael Garcia-Suarez
thanked John (in the name of all perl5 porters
and lovers, I dare to say) and gave a clue
on making tests more portable.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-10/msg00754.html


B<VMS exit handling>
After sorting out most of the issues in exit handling 
in VMS, John E. Malmberg asked for help to make it
right once and for all. In fact, he did work out
his own way and regretted not being able to change
the default behavior due to the compatibility burden,
which was commented by Rafael Garcia-Suarez.
And then John posted what he expects to
be the last VMS exit/error fixes that were needed.

    Call for help
    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-10/msg00746.html
    Hopefully the last fixes
    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-10/msg00817.html


B< F<vms.c> improvements and fixes >
John E. Malmberg introduced in F<vms.c> a new
C<do_mp_rmsexpand()> to support longer filenames
for platforms/versions where it makes sense.
While on this, he fixed memory leaks in old 
C<do_mp_rmsexpand()> and made code safer with
C<memmove()> replacing C<memcpy()>.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-10/msg00837.html


B< C<sprintf> on VMS >
John E. Malmberg posted a minor change to reflect
the fact that C<sprintf> in VMS returns the length
of the buffer. 

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-10/msg00802.html

=head2 Jarkko and Symbian


This week, Nicholas Clark and Jarkko Hietaniemi discussed what changes would
be needed to make C<Encode> work with the constraint of non-writeable
data on Symbian. The issue at stage was how changes in underlying structure 
types would break compatibility among C<Encode> and older format
encode tables.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-10/msg00700.html

Jarkko also announced better support for Series 80 devices
and some handy utilities for Perl on Symbian.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-10/msg00840.html

=head2 More Platform Specific Issues


B< Cygwin, C<unlink>, Win32 >
Sébastien Aperghis-Tramoni noticed how weird Perl on Cygwin
can be when issuing code like this:

    open FILE, '>', $file;
    unlink $file or warn $!;
    opendir DIR, '.';
    print "here yet" if grep { $_ eq $file } readdir(DIR)

C<unlink()> succeeds but the file can
be seen yet with C<readdir()>, even though it is gone when
the script ends or when the file is closed. 
To Sébastien, it does not feel like Unix or Windows.
Yitzchak Scott-Thoennes quoted F<perlport>: "Don't
C<unlink> or C<rename> an open file" for portable code.
Some discussion ensued with Yitzchak Scott-Thoennes unveiling 
the relevant
Perl source code and Yves Orton explaining oddities
in Win32 API. Very instructive and scary.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-10/msg00846.html


B<AIX Woes>
David Favor had some trouble building blead on AIX.
Rafael Garcia-Suarez pointed it was probably due to 
the F<Makefile> failing to use F<makedef.pl> to generate F<perl.exp>
where that matters. And then it worked.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-10/msg00886.html


B< EBCDIC, Unicode, C<unpack> >
Sadahiro Tomoyuki explained the results Rajarshi Das was seing
using C<unpack> with formats 'U' and 'C' on EBCDIC platforms:
a UTF-8 versus UTF-EBCDIC issue.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-10/msg00889.html


B< A Linux Issue >
Jason Vas Dias found F<perl.h> to incorrectly guess the C<IOPARM_LEN>
on Linux to be constant 256 and posted a patch to use
the C<_IOC_SIZE> as it should. Rafael tweaked the change
to avoid misterious side-effects on some other random platform
and applied it.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-10/msg00826.html


=head2 Perl5 Bug Summary


The open tickets count was at 1519 in Oct 24 13:00. 

    Robert Spier and the Bug summary
    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-10/msg00257.html
    Perl RT just now
    http://rt.perl.org/rt3/NoAuth/perl5/Overview.html 



=head2 In Brief


B< Exit Code in 5.8.8? >
Nicholas Clark, after seeing a lot of patching in exit code,
asked whether it just had to do with VMS or if it affects Unix
and Windows sides. He wondered about the convenience
of integrating this to maint now or in a couple of months.
No answer so far.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-10/msg00775.html


B< Revisited cc/cppsymbols >
Yitzchak Scott-Thoennes posted a patch to fix
a long-standing bug on Configure's test for cppsymbols
with values which contain spaces, such as Cygwin's
C<_LONG_DOUBLE=long double>.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-10/msg00709.html


B< F<mv-if-diff> Days are Counted >
Rafael Garcia-Suarez posted a patch to remove F<mv-if-diff> from the main
makefile and asked for people to try it. Nicholas did and found the
need for a tweak.

    The "remove mv-if-diff" campaign summarized
    http://dev.perl.org/perl5/list-summaries/2005/20050926.html#The_Future_of_mv-if-diff
    This week
    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-10/msg00788.html


B< White Smokes for C<Compress::Zlib> >
Without much ado, Paul Marquess filed a fix for
the C<Compress::Zlib>'s smoke failures seen on 
Win32, which was applied by H.Merijn Brand
with great expectations.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-10/msg00794.html


B< F<warnings.pm> Works as It Should >
Rafael Garcia-Suarez dismissed bug #36781
which claimed functions C<enabled>, C<warn>, C<warnif>
in F<warnings.pm> were buggy. He explained
how the reported behavior was the intented one
according to the docs and Paul Marquess
noted it is all there in F<perllexwarn.pod>.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-10/msg00838.html


B< Named Escapes in Eval >
Peter Scott noticed an oddity when using named
escapes in evals and thought a POD fix could be in
order. Sadahiro Tomoyuki suggested the issue
could be slightly different as well as the appropriate doc fix.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-10/msg00870.html


B< Misleading Closures in Regexes >
William L. Devanney opened RT ticket #37543 after
being surprised with how C<$^N> worked with respect
to global and lexical variables. Jeff 'japhy' Pinyan
explained the point was the use of regex
construction C<?{}> which creates a closure
around the lexical environment and a known bug
that makes it refer to the first time
the regex is compiled, giving wrong results
for subsequent calls.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-10/msg00866.html


B< F<perl5db.pl> Fix >
Brendan O'Dea sent a patch for fixing an incorrect instruction
in termination message emitted by F<perl5db.pl>.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-10/msg00897.html


B<Free the Tries>
Jarkko Hietaniemi spotted and patched a bug in C<regcomp.c> that prevented
tries to be freed.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-10/msg00905.html

B< C<ExtUtils::Constant> and Perl 5.004 > Sébastien Aperghis-Tramoni
posted a small patch to restore C<ExtUtils::Constant> compatibility
with Perl 5.004.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2005-10/msg00945.html


=head2 About this summary

This summary was written by Adriano Ferreira.
I would like to acknowledge a mistake and apologize myself
to H.Merijn Brand for spelling wrong his name in the last
summaries. Please correct me and send comments.

Information concerning bugs referenced in this summary (as #nnnnn)
may be viewed at http://rt.perl.org/rt3/Ticket/Display.html?id=nnnnn

Information concerning patches to maint or blead referenced in
this summary (as #nnnnn) may be viewed at
http://public.activestate.com/cgi-bin/perlbrowse?patch=nnnnn

Weekly summaries are published on F<http://use.perl.org/> and posted
on a mailing list, (subscription: F<perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org>).
The archive is at F<http://dev.perl.org/perl5/list-summaries/>.

If you found this summary useful or enjoyable, please consider
contributing to the Perl Foundation to help support the development
of Perl.

