=head1 This Week on perl5-porters - 19-25 September 2005

Another week of business as usual. The 5.8.8 progesses steadily,
bugs are found in POD, people post ways of making perl do the
wrong thing, and C<Test::More> is released.

=head2 The continuing saga of blead on VMS

John Malmberg continued his journey making bleadperl work on VMS.
This time he noticed that C<ExtUtils::MM_Unix> can use the command
'false' to indicate falsehood, but that there is no such beast in
VMS.

Michael Schwern suggested solving the problem by adding a layer of
indirection, that is, a scalar that hold the command fragment to
use, such as C<perl -e 'exit 1'>. Peter Prymmer suggested that
C<exit 44> would be a superior choice. John then struck back with
some killer DCL to teach us far more than we ever wanted to know
about exit codes on VMS (and admitted that it is a bit ugly) and
promised to look at C<perlport>, as he suspects that it is probably
out of date.

The main thing to remember is that VMS exit codes are like signals.
They can propagate all the way back to top unless the shell script
takes care in trapping them.

It's quite an interesting thread, even if VMS is not your cup of
tea.

  http://xrl.us/hqx4

John also noticed that the t/io/fs.t triply-linked file test does
not do what the comments says it does. It's actually more about
Unix's C<uname> behaviour. Which makes it a bit tricky to figure
out what to do on VMS. One idea was to make the test test what it
claimed to test.

  http://xrl.us/hqx5

He ended on a high note of proposed VMSish changes, which
appeared to be well received by Craig Berry and Peter Prymmer.

  http://xrl.us/hqx6

=head2 Doing the version bump

Yitzchak Scott-Thoennes pulled down a copy of 5.8.8 to be and ran
the test suite on cygwin. Things went well, except for a failure
in C<op/layers.t> which should be fixed as soon as patch 24767 is
landed in maint.

What went less well is Yitzchak installed it over 5.8.7 by mistake
and expressed desire at seeing the version number being bumped soon
to 5.8.8 to prevent this happening to someone else.

Nicholas was reluctant to do so, until such time as the version
numbering scheme makes it exceedingly clear what the official
maintenance releases are, as opposed to a release in the buildup
to a maintenance release. He pointed out that it is the first task
on the TODO "that need a little C knowledge." John Peacock suggested
a patch.

  The discussion
  http://xrl.us/hqx7

  The TODO as she stands
  http://public.activestate.com/cgi-bin/perlbrowse?file=pod%2Fperltodo.pod&rev=

=head2 An oddity in op.c

The blead version of Perl supports the DOR (defined-or) operator
C<//> (shamelessly pinched from Perl 6), implemented by Brent Dax.
DOR being so nice to have, H.Merijn Brand backported this patch to
maint, and offers a patch to every version of maint perl (5.8.x)
to support it too. Andy Lester's ongoing consting of blead (and
Nicholas's integration of those patches into maint for 5.8.8) has
made H.Merijn's job more difficult than usual to keep his patch
applying cleanly.

As a result of this, H.Merijn spotted some smelly code in the
C<S_new_logop> function, and discussed it with Nicholas Clark. It
has been there since 5.8.0 so it must be working, but it seems
wrong, especially when compared to the same code in blead. Jan
Dubois thought the two fragments were semantically equivalent
although the blead version was more robust.

  The oddity
  http://xrl.us/hqx8

  The Cygwin status
  http://xrl.us/hqx9

  DOR patches for maint
  http://search.cpan.org/CPAN/authors/id/H/HM/HMBRAND/

  H.Merijn's perl for HP-UX and the DOR repository
  http://mirrors.develooper.com/hpux/

=head2 ExtUtils::MakeMaker in maint

Michael Schwern wants the latest version of C<ExtUtils::MakeMaker>
in maint. Or at least any version which is not two years old.
(Michael has been dragging C<EU::MM> into the 21st century for some
time now -- in another thread on C<perl-qa> he even mentioned that
the latest alpha now emits proper license information into the
META.yml file).

John Malmberg gave it a clean bill of health on VMS. Nicholas Clark
recalled some problems with distclean and SDBM_File

  http://xrl.us/hqya

=head2 License clarification for perlglossary.pod

C<perlglossary.pod> is

  Based on the Glossary of Programming Perl, Third Edition,
  by Larry Wall, Tom Christiansen & Jon Orwant.
  Copyright (c) 2000, 1996, 1991 O'Reilly Media, Inc.
  Used with permission.

Well, it used to be. Yitzchak Scott-Thoennes wrote to say that Tim
O'Reilly said that the last sentence can be changed to

  This document may be distributed under the same terms
  as Perl itself.

And there was much rejoicing.

  The patch
  http://xrl.us/hqyb

  The forwarded message from Allison
  http://xrl.us/hqyc

=head2 Building perl on AIX

Alan Olsen had problems building 64-bit Perl 5.8.7 on AIX 5.2.
Campo Weijerman asked for some information, Alan replied and then
nothing else was heard, so apparently he fixed it. Alan then sent
another message saying that he was having more problems on 5.3 and
again Campo Weijerman came to the rescue. Apparently AIX just won't
let you build perl with C<-Duse64bitall> and C<-Duseithreads>. AIX
is strange.

  http://xrl.us/hqyd

=head2 File::Find::find and {follow => 1} on Win32

Steve Hay reported in bug #37223 that it doesn't work, and that
C<follow> and C<follow_fast> should be no-ops on Win32, since the
file system doesn't support symbolic links.

Rafael Garcia-Suarez couldn't believe nobody had noticed it until
now. Steve Peters guiltily raised his hand and pointed to patch
#23510.

  http://xrl.us/hqye

=head2 Fixing pod/pod2usage2.t

Merijn sent in a patch for C<pod/pod2usage2.t> but the attachment
was eaten by a grue. Nicholas pointed out that the C<perl.org> MTA
eats anything that looks like C</\.t$/>. B<Newsflash>: apparently
now fixed.

Merijn resent the patch with a C<.txt> extension, but it still
contains a Unixism (C<open(IN, "-|")> that doesn't work quite right
on Win32. He remembered that C<t/op/write.t> has a workaround for
this.

  http://xrl.us/hqyf

=head2 Regexp stack overflow in 5.8.7

Brian Candler reported bug #37230 where C<^"(?:[^"\\]|\\.)*"\s+\d+\s+(\d+)>
(used to munge Apache log files) bombed out with deep recursion,
and he couldn't see why the engine would want to backtrack (notably,
over the C<(?:[^"\\]|\\.)> bit - "anything except a double quote
or backslash, or a backslash followed by anything.")

Hugo van der Sanden explained that the engine lacks the capacity
to analyse the alternations and see that they are mutually exclusive.

Abigail suggested using C</"[^"\\]*(?:\\.[^"\\]*)*"/s> instead,
since it removes all alternations. Brian reported that with a
sufficiently long target string, this expression will still cause
perl to dump core. Yitzchak suggested
C<< /"[^"\\]*(?>\\.[^"\\]*)*"/s >> as an alternative (The rarely
used, rarely understood C<< (?>...) >> assertion).

Brian said that that one dumped core too. Abigail concluded that
sometimes, core dumps happen.

  http://xrl.us/hqyg

=head2 Too late for INIT

Hugo wondered why perl refuses to run INIT blocks, simply because a
module has been loaded via C<require> rather than C<use>, and thought it
an odd wart. Rafael suggested adding a C<UNITCHECK> code block, that
would be run regardless of how the module was loaded.

  The thread
  http://xrl.us/hqyh

  Possible source of Hugo's question, from Perlmonks
  http://www.perlmonks.org/index.pl?node_id=494439

=head2 Another major bug in PerlIO

Ilya Zakharevich wrote in to say that he thought it must be easier to
rewrite the PerlIO layer from scratch rather than attempt to fix bugs in
it.

  unix2dos .tcshrc | \
  perl -we 'binmode STDIN, ":crlf" or die;
    print while read STDIN, $_, 32000'

Looks simple, but it doesn't work. He truss'ed the program and observed
two seeks and read for each converted line ending, which of course does
wonders for performance. Nick Ing-Simmons replied, saying that what was
needed is an efficient version of C<:crlf>.

  http://xrl.us/hqyi

=head2 Kill mv-if-diff?

Nicholas Clark raised the issue of C<mv-if-diff>, a little shell script
hack used by C<make> to avoid damaging the timestamps on auto-generated
files, if the contents haven't actually changed.

He noted that on a clean rebuild, C<lib/unicore/mktables> is run 7 times
(when only once would suffice). It gets much worse after editing a file
and rebuilding. Cascading effects cause a merry-go-round of files being
rebuilt.

And parallel makes are also broken. (The summariser, having access to a
six-CPU box, can confirm that a C<make -j 18> causes spectacular
fireworks). Nicholas wonders if these two observations are related, and
that things might be a whole lot better if C<mv-if-diff> was simply
thrown away.

Steve Peters thought it was a symptom of insufficient targets and
dependencies to keep track of the build. Russ Allbery thought it was
C<mv-if-diff> that was lacking in capability, because otherwise it would
do The Right Thing. Vadim Konovalov suggested a heavy engineering
approach with additional helper files.

Joshua Juran identified the problem as being the issue of attempting to
manage two pieces of information (the date a file was changed, and the
date it was confirmed up-to-date) in the same slot. The Macintosh
filesystem has a backup date field on files which could be pressed into
service for this, but that is non-portable. His second suggestion was
to throw away the broken optimisation that is C<mv-if-diff>.

Yves Orton brought patches 24004, 24056 and 24320 back up on the radar,
saying that all this business is probably the cause of those patches.

  http://xrl.us/hqyj

=head2 New modules

Michael Schwern announced C<Test::Simple/More/Builder> version 0.61.
Lots of new goodies and fixes.

  http://xrl.us/hqyk

=head2 Using Test::More to test Math::Complex

Jarkko Hietaniemi wanted a pair of fresh eyes to take t/Complex.t
from C<Math::Complex> and rewrite it using C<Test::More>. Michael
Schwern sketched out briefly how it might be done. Since the data
for the tests are stored in a C<__DATA__> section of the script,
Jarkko wanted a test failure to display something like:

  not ok 123
  #   Failed test in Complex.t at line 56, <DATA> line 1234.
  #          got: '1+2i'
  #     expected: '1+i'

Michael showed how this could be approximated to a first degree
using C<diag()>, but that the real solution would be to override
C<Test::Builder>'s diagnostics, but that it's not yet quite
flexible enough to do that.

  http://xrl.us/hqym

=head2 In brief

Smylers filed bug #37199 relating to mangled POD in C<File::Basename>
and Steve Hay replied that the problem had already been fixed in blead.

Dan "Unstorable" Kogai noted that $Storable::drop_utf8 seems ineffective
on Perl 5.8.x, and went on to say why, supported by code fragments in
Perl and C. He wondered whether the code or documentation should be
fixed. He was Warnocked.

  http://xrl.us/hqyn

Yitzchak sent in a patch to silence a couple of compiler warnings (three
out of seven). Rafael fell asleep at the wheel and had to be pinged to
apply it two days later.

  http://xrl.us/hqyo

Paul Marquess supplied a patch to sync C<Compress::Zlib> 1.40 with core.
Patch applied with alacrity by Rafael.

  http://xrl.us/hqyp

Alex Davies reported a memory leak in #37231 when eval'ing syntactically
incorrect code.
 
  while (1) {
    eval "sub { \$foo = "; # closing } missing 
  }

... the above will rapidly consume all available memory (don't try this at
home). No takers yet; Dave Mitchell must be busy doing something else.

"lace" reported in #37250 that C<pod2html> does not produce XHTML-conformant
code.

  http://xrl.us/hqyq

Jan Hudec posted more ways of making perl panic, but cheated by using UTF-8
in the PerlIO layer.

  http://xrl.us/hqyr

Taro Kawagishi found a problem with C<perlfaq3> "How do I find which
modules are installed on my system?", and supplied code to deal with the
case when a directory path listed in @INC is a symbolic link.

  http://xrl.us/hqys

Steve Peters posted a patch (#25571) to get C<PERL_DEBUG_COW> (Copy On
Write) working correctly on the smoke tests.

  http://xrl.us/hqyt

=head2 About this summary

This summary was written by David Landgren.

Information concerning bugs referenced in this summary (as #nnnnn)
may be viewed at http://rt.perl.org/rt3/Ticket/Display.html?id=nnnnn

Information concerning patches to maint or blead referenced in
this summary (as #nnnnn) may be viewed at
http://public.activestate.com/cgi-bin/perlbrowse?patch=nnnnn

Weekly summaries are published on F<http://use.perl.org/> and posted
on a mailing list, (subscription: F<perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org>).
The archive is at F<http://dev.perl.org/perl5/list-summaries/>.
Corrections and comments are welcome.

If you found this summary useful or enjoyable, please consider
contributing to the Perl Foundation to help support the development
of Perl.
