=head1 This Week on perl5-porters - 22 December 2007-29 December 2007

"Remember, everyone is a beginner, but only for a small time." -- Abigail,
on why you can't please everyone, everywhere, all the time.

=head1 Topics of Interest

The summaries are back! I had meant to get this out earlier this
week, but the season's festivities got the better of me. Enjoy! -- David

=head2 Consting goodness done to excess

Robin Barker, in a remarkable coincidence of increasing the summariser's
burden, went about adding C<const> goodness to XS modules in the core
distribution.

  MIME::Base64 and Digest::MD5 (not applied)
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2007-12/msg00656.html

  Compress::Raw::Zlib and Filter::Util::Call (not applied)
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2007-12/msg00657.html

  Cwd and ExtUtils::ParseXS (applied, with slight turbulence)
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2007-12/msg00658.htmL

  IO (not applied)
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2007-12/msg00659.html

  Storable (applied)
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2007-12/msg00660.html

  Digest::SHA (applied)
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2007-12/msg00661.html

Not to mention the judicious application of a C<NUM2PTR> macro (applied)

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2007-12/msg00748.html

=head2 C<grep> and smart match should warn in void context

Michael G. Schwern wondered why a C<grep> operation performed in void
context produced no warnings. The idea being that since a grep is a
filtering operation over a list, you either want to get back some, all or
none of the list, or possibly the number of elements that matched. But to
want nothing at all was either stupid, an error, or some sort of obfuscation.

Nicholas Clark asked Michael to write some TODO tests to nail down the
desired behaviour, but Michael went one better and produced a first cut
at a patch to do what he wanted.

Yitzchak Scott-Thoennes wasn't against the idea, but wanted to make sure
there was a simple way to disable the warning message, just in case.
Rather than introduce a new C<void> keyword, Michael pointed out that
C<scalar grep foo(), list()> works just as well.

  obfuscated map, anyone?
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2007-12/msg00692.html

=head2 Big slowdown in 5.10 C<@_> parameter passing

Yves Orton forwarded a message from the DBIx-Class mailing list, where
they had discovered with horror that

  my ($x, $y, $z) = @_;

has become unacceptably slow in 5.10 (whereas a semantically equivalent
code block using C<shift> ran as swiftly as ever). Dave Mitchell
discovered that the optimiser had become confused, and was running the list
assignment through the code path that spends the extra cycles that makes
sure that

  ($x, $y) = ($y, $x)

works as expected. That is, extra care has to be taken when there are
variables common to both sides of the assignment, otherwise things get
clobbered.

  wish they had taken 5.10 for a spin earlier
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2007-12/msg00700.html

Paul Johnson identified the patch responsible. No solution as yet.

  it was just a teeny bug fix
  http://public.activestate.com/cgi-bin/perlbrowse?patch=28488

=head2 Should lexicals used only once warn?

Nicholas Clark asked innocently whether it would make sense to have
the interpreter warn about lexical variables that were defined and
then never used afterwards. A volley of reasons as to why this would
not be a good idea followed, and ten days later the thread was still
bubbling along nicely. Lots of nice idioms in there worth pondering;
I liked Hugo van der Sanden's resource lock trick.

  don't call us, we'll call you
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2007-12/msg00701.html

=head2 Extra warnings for beginners

Gabor Szabo kicked off a slightly shorter thread as to whether it would
help to have extra warnings that would help beginners not fall prey to
some types of simple errors. A concensus formed rather rapidly that this
would not be a Good Idea.

  use brain;
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2007-12/msg00706.html

=head2 C<Configure -Dunknown_config_var> should exit with error

Jim Cromie wrote a simple patch to make C<Configure> do sanity
checking on its command line. Andy Dougherty explained just how
hard it was to do such a thing correctly, as hints files complicate
the picture.

H.Merijn Brand began to work on the scripts used to build the
F<Configure> file itself, and pulled his hair out over the bizarro
coding style used. Jim Cromie was worried that if H.Merijn and Andy
were simultaneously unable to work on shepherding the configuration
infrastructure, The Perl project would be seriously stalled.

  bus fault in undisclosed location
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2007-12/msg00725.html

=head2 Optimising opcodes

Jim Cromie had been wondering whether all the null op-codes left
behind after the optimiser was done with an op-tree could cause
cache misses due to bloat, as the CPU ran ahead of the data pipeline.
Nicholas Clark wanted to find out whether adding another pass that
threw away the dead ops, rearranging the ops into a more sensible
order and storing them with a slab allocator would be a win.

Paul Johnson pointed out that one consequence would be that some error
messages would no longer be able to relate to line number, as currently
that information is stored in the very nullops that Nicholas was
proposing to throw away.

  need some running code for concensus
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2007-12/msg00744.html

Later on in the week, Jim returned with a patch to move op-sibling pointers
out of OPs, the theory being that it reduces the optree's cache footprint
by 20%. Unfortunately the MJD advice about getting the wrong answer as fast
as possible applies, since the patch (which Jim admits is a work in progress)
causes things to dump core.

  it's a start
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2007-12/msg00817.html

=head2 Storable for bytecode?

Since the decision to jettison the Perl compiler for 5.10, perl no
longer has a bytecode loader. Nicholas observed that C<Storable>
can serialise stuff, so, how much effort would it take before it
could store an optree? And, at that point, would we have a byteloader?
First up, Storable doesn't do regular expressions or typeglobs or...
a whole lot of things it turns out, all of which are vital for an
optree. Nicholas wondered whether it was feasible, easy or impossible.

Hugo said that the first step (this no doubt applies to the above
thread of optimising opcodes as well) would be to overhaul the
optimiser to separate the manditory fixups (that if absent, would
cause the code to be unrunnable) from the true optimisations.

chromatic thought that a more promising avenue would be to remove
the pessimisation in Perl 5 that makes the interpreter to poke at
everything incessantly in case there's some sort of magic behaviour
lying in ambush to do something completely different.

  the last frontier
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2007-12/msg00743.html

=head2 APC now includes perl-5.10

Philippe M. Chiasson updated the APC (All Perl Changes repository) to
include the 5.10 track. Since it has been over five years since the 5.8
track was created, there was considerable head-scratching on how to do
a couple of things that had been lost in the mists of time.

Philippe was hoping that Sarathy could chip in with what he recalled of
the process.

  write it down for 5.12
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2007-12/msg00747.html

=head2 Array ~~ Any

Michael G. Schwern caught wind of a thread on Perlmonks discussing the
behaviour in something like

  42 ~~ ['foo', 15]

warning, which some people find rather unsettling, about "foo" not
being numeric. Michael wondered if something could be done about the
matter.

  JFDWIM
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2007-12/msg00799.html

=head2 Smart matching with objects

Ricardo Signes thought that smart matching and objects didn't mix very
well as things stand, and suggested that objects participate in smart
matching only if they overload C<~~>. This is a pretty reasonable
suggestion, as it gives the object the power to decide how it smart
matches, rather than the operator blindly assume that anything behind
the implementation curtain is fair game.

Tels was surprised to learn that it was even possible to overload C<~~>
and began to wonder whether C<Math::BigInt> objects and their relatives
needed to do so. (Answer: yes, probably).

Michael thought that the path of least resistance would be to make
a smart match against an object die, unless the class had overloaded
C<~~>. Ricardo was a little squeamish at first, but realised that
it solves future backward-compatibility concerns nicely: no need
to suffer the result of a poor choice in what tricksy dwimmery C<~~>
the porters could invent on the spur of the moment to deal with a
not-smart-match-aware object.

Larry Wall chipped in to point out that the smart match, as implemented
in Perl 5 today, is now considered a misfeature in Perl 6, and there
smart match behaves differently. That is, the match is determined solely
by the nature of the RHS argument. Which means that if Perl 5 wants
to borrow from the future and implement Perl 6 ideas, we need to track
things more closely.

  electing to match
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2007-12/msg00865.html

=head2 C<~~> changing behaviour after using C<==>?

In a similar vein, Gabor Szabo reported being tripped up by two
scalars being smart matched, then tested for numeric equality, and
then watching a subsequent smart match return a different result.
This was in spite of the fact that the scalars had not changed value.

No-one had a really good answer, but Mark-Jason Dominus thought
it reminded him of a heisenproblem with C<vec> a few years back
which in his recollection wound up labelled as, at best, a misfeature.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2007-12/msg00991.html

In the final thread of the week concerning smart matching, Jerry D. Hedden
patched the documentation to indicate that C<~~> is not a feature.

  it just is (unapplied)
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2007-12/msg00890.html

=head2 Localising C<$@> in a C<BEGIN> block

... prevents perl from noticing errors in the block. As related by Yves
Orton, following a thread on Perlmonks. No-one ventured a reason as to why.

  looks like a bug
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2007-12/msg00815.html

=head2 Always to use strict

Steffen Müller, whose post for some reason isn't showing up on Xray
(and thus we point you to the first follow-up in the thread),
suggested that it would be a really great idea to enable C<use
strict> by default for 5.11 (and hence 5.12).

While I was expecting a flamefest, surprisingly, everyone was more
or less in agreement, although a push to enable C<use warnings>
as well had Abigail wringing her hands in dismay.

  there is no strict
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2007-12/msg00835.html

Steffen cooked up a first cut at a patch to implement the desired
behaviour, but Rafaël declined it, explaining that it felt a
bit too hackish and suggested a better approach.

  the heat is on
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2007-12/msg00878.html

=head2 Weird BEGIN block CV assignment behaviour

Peter Scott reported a question seen on c.l.p.m concerning typeglobs,
C<BEGIN> blocks and comments, for which he had no satisfactory
answer. Nicholas and Dave Mitchell weren't able to do much better
apart from some sympathetic waving of hands.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2007-12/msg00866.html

=head2 Regexps are people, too

Ricardo dreamt about the possibility letting an object knowing when it
was being used in a regexp context, which would allow it to be used with ease
in pattern matches and substitutions, and splits.

  my life is made of patterns
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2007-12/msg00888.html

So Nicholas set about making regexps orange (no, don't ask). As part of the
fallout, Jerry D. Hedden noticed that it caused threads tests to fail and
proposed a patch to fix it.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2007-12/msg00892.html

Jerry then fixed the "orange" regexps in threads.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2007-12/msg00903.html

The shaking up of the code base in this way uncovered something else we
weren't testing for, so Nicholas added a test:

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2007-12/msg00908.html

And that brought us first class regexps (like C<ARRAY> and C<HASH>), rather
than C<Regexp> objects. Nicholas tried to change it to C<REGEXP>
but too many things broke. The underlying implementation structure is nothing
more (for the moment) than a PVMG (a thing of magic) with a pointer to the
regexp structure. The quest was on to see what could be hoisted out of the
latter structure (such as reference counting) into the PVMG, since it had a
slew of unused elements begging to be used.

Yves Orton liked the idea, and felt that it could go quite some way in
reducing the complexity of the regexp engine. Nicholas continued to chip away
at now-obsolete infrastructure code... until his monitor gave up the ghost.

There was idle chatter about renaming the REGEXP type to REGEX, RULE and
PATTERN. ORANGE and PLUM also got a look in.

  he makes it look so easy
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2007-12/msg00932.html

=head2 When C<strict 'refs'> is not strict enough

Mark-Jason Dominus penned a thoughtful critique of why he thought
strict 'refs' was not good enough. it was well-written enough to
be summarised as: "stringifying a reference is probably an error".
If you really need to do so, you should be explicit about it. Having
it done implicitly is probably unwise.

Michael S. made a couple of pertinent remarks as to why things had
to be the way they were.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2007-12/msg00924.html

=head1 Patches of Interest

Jan Dubois's 64-bit fix for C<Time::Local> was applied.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2007-12/msg00812.html

And his patch to bring blead up to 5.11 on Win32 was also applied.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2007-12/msg00768.html

Vincent Pit found a two year old typo in F<op.c> (using C<&&> instead
of C<&>) and offered a patch. Nicholas applied it.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2007-12/msg00785.html

=head2 Obsolete C<Nullxx> macros

Jan Dubois spotted some now-obsolete Nullxx macros in C<x2p> and took out
the axe. Applied by Marcus.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2007-12/msg00767.html

Elsewhere in the tree, Jim Cromie found a couple of Nullstrs that had been
missed in the initial cull. Also applied by Marcus.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2007-12/msg00780.html

One of these changes may have been the reason why Jerry D. Hedden had
to fix F<cygwin.c> again.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2007-12/msg00679.html

=head2 Loss of context with C<return do { my $x; 1}> constructs

Some years back, Vincent Pit reported a bug (#38809) that reveals
how C<return do {my $x; 1}> returns undef, yet C<return do {1}>
returns 1 (except in taint mode).

It's all slightly confusing until you look at the output from
C<B::Concise>, which shows how the result from the C<do> block gets
discarded. Vincent Pit proposed a simple brute-force patch that
does better, pointing out that a more subtle approach would be
better, and requested comments (but received none) on the matter.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2007-12/msg00790.html

=head2 Replace C<FH> by C<my $fh> in C<open>

Gabor thought it would be a good idea to use lexical filehandles in the
documentation instead of globs. Michael G. Schwern thought so too.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2007-12/msg00795.html

He also suggesting listing where $_ is used. This was applied.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2007-12/msg00797.html

He followed up with another patch which received a lot more attention
and came back with a revised version. Not yet applied.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2007-12/msg00823.html

=head2 Factor out duplicate code in C<struct xpv*>

Marcus Holland-Moritz was puzzled, because with a short amount of work,
he removed 377 lines of code and reduced the duplication of some
hard-to-keep-in-sync code. He wondered if it was so blindingly obvious
that no-one had spotted it before, or whether it was that way because
of some impossibly subtle edge case.

On the downside, some struct members need to be wrapped in macros. On
the other hand, some structures become identical, for instance, C<XPVIV>
and C<XPVUV> are defined the same way.

Nicholas Clark was worried that the extra macroification might cause
cranky compilers, such as the one on AIX, to have a fit. H.Merijn
Brand took the patch for a spin on an AIX machine he had handy and
gave it a clean bill of health.

Marcus discovered that there are 63 macros in the codebase that expand
to more than 533 bytes, the grand-daddy of them all being
C<REXEC_TRIE_READ_CHAR> weighing in at 3697. In the end the patch
was applied.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2007-12/msg01011.html

=head1 Watching the smoke signals

=head2 Smoke [5.11.0] 32712 FAIL(m) MSWin32 WinXP/.Net SP2 (x86/2 cpu)

Steve Peters looked at one of Steve Hay's smoke failures, and thought
that it would be fixed by change #32713.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2007-12/msg00686.html

=head2 Smoke [5.11.0] 32718 FAIL(M) OSF1 V5.1 (EV6/4 cpu)

Jarkko Hietaniemi wondered if some recent change had broken the
ability to compile the source with a C++ compiler (other than g++).

  and after all that effort
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2007-12/msg00738.html

=head1 New and old bugs from RT

=head2 C<pod2html>: Various markup errors with (nested) definition lists (#45211)

Steve Peters applied a patch that came from Debian.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2007-12/msg00810.html

=head2 C<CGI::Util::escape> broken for iso-8859-1 data (#49055)

Slaven Rezic reported that this was broken in 5.10. Ævar Arnfjörð
Bjarmason traced the problem down to the change in C<pack> formats.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2007-12/msg00732.html

=head2 C<SIGTERM> not terminating child process (#49073)

Jerry D. Hedden noted that a C<SIGTERM> was not killing its child
properly, resulting in a failure in C<Time::HiRes>'s test suite.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2007-12/msg00742.html

=head2 C<$_[0]> seems to get reused inappropriately (#49115)

schmorp filed a report that boils down to being yet another
C<Bizarre copy of ARRAY in sassign at Carp/Heavy.pm>-type bug.

  need to get to the bottom of this
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2007-12/msg00834.html

=head2 C<\R> doesn't backtrack into C<\r\n> (#49149)

Abigail discovered the above behaviour, but Yves was of the opinion
that the Unicode specification pretty much imposes it.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2007-12/msg00919.html

=head2 C<$REGMARK> not available in REPLACEMENT (#49190)

Abigail also reported that C<$REGMARK> is not available on the right
hand side of an C<s///> expression.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2007-12/msg01043.html

So naturally, Yves fixed it.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2007-12/msg00994.html

=head2 nested closures keep scalars alive (#49208)

schmorp reported a bug (on 5.8) regarding closures holding into
scalars for too long, thus preventing them from being destructed before
the end of the program.

  hmm...
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2007-12/msg01047.html

Dave Mitchell confirmed that the correct, desired behaviour is seen
on 5.10

  one reason to make the switch
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2007-12/msg01033.html

=head2 Perl5 Bug Summary

307 new, 1465 open makes 1772 tickets (ouch). 28 created this week, 6 closed.

  http://rt.perl.org/rt3/NoAuth/perl5/Overview.html

=head1 New Core Modules

=over 4

=item constant 1.14

Sébastien Aperghis-Tramoni pushed out a new version of C<constant>
and then a second version followed hot on its heels (1.14), with the
actual fix that 1.13 was supposed to contain.

  this is the one
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2007-12/msg00880.html

=item SelfLoader 1.13_01

Steffen Müller made himself co-maintainer of SelfLoader, dual-lifed it,
and pushed a development version out to CPAN.

  pull yourself in
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2007-12/msg00808.html

Prior to this, Andreas König reported that the previous version was
unhappy on 5.6.x

  what does '<&' on open do, anyway?
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2007-12/msg00740.html

=back

=head1 This is the BBC

Andreas König runs a smoke rig that checks as many CPAN modules in
the shortest time possible against the most recent version of bleadperl,
to see what breaks. Hence, Blead Breaks CPAN, or BBC.

  32013 broke Apache::DB (0.13)
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2007-12/msg00864.html

  32707 broke Data::Alias, Devel::Declare anD autobox
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2007-12/msg00777.html

  32734 broke Params::Validate and Clone
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2007-12/msg00833.html

(The final item was reported by Steve Peters).

=head1 In Brief

Michael discovered that blockless greps run as fast as blocky
greps, but both are about twice as slow as using a smart match.

  The color of surprise
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2007-12/msg00674.html

Tels had some Warnocked C<Math::BigInt>, Ubuntu and C<Module::Install> woes

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2007-12/msg00671.html

Marcus readied himself for the push to C<IPC::SysV> 2.0

  if all goes according to plan
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2007-12/msg00677.html

Nicholas responded to a May 2005 thread and replaced the C-level
assert mechanism in the C<perl> source by the standard C library assert 
mechanism.

  not dead yet
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2007-12/msg00689.html

He also noticed with some dismay that there was no simple, elegant method
for detecting the building of modules under the core. The C<PERL_CORE=1>
signal was used in just about every way imaginable.

  Build a better core trap
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2007-12/msg00711.html

Continuing, we find that he considers C<gcc -pedantic> to be a mixed blessing,
since it unfortunately disables a few important things like inlining macros,
which kill performance.

  Bondage & discipline and speed: choose 1
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2007-12/msg00802.html

Andy Lester reported on 5.10 coverage on the tech web sites

  www.news.com
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2007-12/msg00826.html

Sam Vilain, who has been working on getting the entire perl source
history into a C<git> repository reported that its tag for 5.004_05
returned the wrong set of files and in tracking down the reason,
discovered that C<Module::CoreList> was probably wrong and issued
a patch to fix it (unapplied).

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2007-12/msg00847.html

Jim Cromie, noticing that the Perforce repository was close to change 32768,
or 2**15, tries to flog it off to someone willing to donate TPF, only to
discover that H.Merijn Brand had carelessly burnt it several hours previously
on a minor whitespace tweak.

  changes 33333 and 34567 still up for grabs
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2007-12/msg01005.html

Ricardo proposed real exceptions for 5.12, picking up on some topics that
were discussed in the run up to 5.10. None of the few people who answered
were against the idea.

  something to be pursued
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2007-12/msg00938.html

Gabor encountered a surprising test failure when building with a nonsensical
path, as in C<sh Configure -Dprefix==/path/to/perl>. (Note the C<==>). As
the failure was somewhere in ExtUtils, Schwern sighed and said he'd have a
look at it.

  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailinG-lists/perl5-porters/2007-12/msg01030.html

Marcus discovered a 8 year old bug (or at least a
performance drain), and quietly committed a patch to fix it.

  UTF-8 file to UTF-8 scalar now 8% faster!
  http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2007-12/msg01051.html

=head2 About this summary

This summary was written by David Landgren as part of the Vienna.pm
Winter of Code project. Thanks Vienna!

Weekly summaries are published on F<http://use.perl.org/> and posted
on a mailing list, (subscription: F<perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org>).
The archive is at F<http://dev.perl.org/perl5/list-summaries/>.
Corrections and comments are welcome.

If you found this summary useful, please consider contributing to
the Perl Foundation to help support the development of Perl.
