=head1 This Week on perl5-porters (2-8 December 2002)

This week, besides some bug reports involving UTF8 locales, the porters
discussed a wide range of subjects, from Mathematics to English, not
forgetting about some old Unix thingies, such as system calls and
termcaps.

=head2 Alisiasing magic variables (in English.pm)

Kevin Moore reported bug #18874 : sometimes, with perl 5.8.0, the $&
variable is not correctly aliased to $MATCH. Andreas Koenig's little
gnomes quickly identified the patch that introduced this regression, and
it was reverted, with a proper regression test added. The root cause of
the bug is apparently that aliasing variables (via C<*MATCH = \$&>)
doesn't work as well with magic than aliasing globs (C<*MATCH = *&>).
In other words, it's a can of worms.

=head2 Mathematics

Tels was busy this week on the Math::Big* modules. He fixed several
bugs, and apparently his fixes led to performance improvements.
I won't summarize Tels' eloquent missive, so here it is :

    http://archive.develooper.com/perl5-porters@perl.org/msg89601.html

He also worked on the square root and nth root functions. Nobody
commented on his work, but I think that's because (1) these modules are
scary, (2) mathematics are scary, (3) quoting Tels, I<the deeper you dig,
the more sh*t you find.>

    http://archive.develooper.com/perl5-porters@perl.org/msg89639.html

=head2 getservbyport

Alan Burlison found that getservbyport(), unlike getservbyname(), doesn't
accept an empty string as its second argument (the protocol). This is not
consistent (and not consistent with the getservent(3) manpage.) Slaven
Rezic provided a fix.

    http://archive.develooper.com/perl5-porters@perl.org/msg89644.html

=head2 $ENV{TERM} and taint checks

After some discussion on the causes of bug #18717, Rafael Garcia-Suarez
put in minor change in the set of characters that are considered to be
safe in $ENV{TERM} regarding the tainting mechanism. Now, if you run perl
with -T, and if your terminal name contains a character which is
non-alphanumeric and not in C<[-_.+]>, perl will consider $ENV{TERM}
tainted.

    http://archive.develooper.com/perl5-porters@perl.org/msg89431.html

=head2 More UTF8 locale bugs

UTF8-locale-related bugs continue to flood the porters. Wilbur Goltermann
reported bug #18857, about a C<s///> substitution that fails with a
coredump, under a UTF8 locale. Vilem Marsik reported a bug in the perl
debugger (#18915) that appears to be related to a capturing regexp that
doesn't like UTF8. Bug #18931, reported by Bhavesh Davda, is about a
C<\U...\E> expression not behaving correctly, also under an UFT8 locale.
It seems to be related as well to regular expressions. Last but not least,
warnings reported by perl are not UTF8-aware (bug-#5956-revival).

=head2 ExtUtils::ParseXS

Ken Williams is working on converting xsubpp (the part of MakeMaker that
preprocesses XS files to C code) into a module, for which he proposed the
name ExtUtils::ParseXS. He explains : I<The reason I'm doing this is so
that the functionality can be used in other contexts, other platforms, and
other build environments like Module::Build.> Brian Ingerson found the
idea interesting for Inline::C.

    http://archive.develooper.com/perl5-porters@perl.org/msg89698.html

=head2 In brief

Hugo van der Sanden integrated into the core the new version of perldoc
(and the relevant Pod::Perldoc::* modules), by Sean M. Burke. (This new
perldoc is also available from the CPAN.)

Nicholas Clark fixed the bug (#18651) reported last week, pertaining to
restricted hashes.

Rafael fixed three obscure memory corruption bugs in the lexer, and
apparently found some other ones.

=head2 About this summary

This summary brought to you by Rafael Garcia-Suarez, both on
F<http://use.perl.org/> and via a mailing list, which subscription address
is F<perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org>. Comments and corrections are, as
always, welcome.
