=head1 This Week on perl5-porters (9-15 September 2002)

This was not a very busy week, with people packing for YAPC::Europe, and
all that... Nevertheless, the smoke tests were running, the bug reports
were flying, and an appropriate amount of patches were sent. Read about
printf formats, serialized tied thingies, built-in leak testing, syntax
oddities, et alii.

=head2 printf format documentation

Allen Smith pointed out (in bug report #17075) that the documentation
for printf in perlfunc is innaccurate regarding the C<%g> and C<%G> format
specifiers. In fact, the thread goes through commentary of the C standard,
and its implementation (or should I say interpretation) on various
platforms (e.g. the availability of the C<long long> type).

    http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=rt-17075-36916.14.3025032754936%40bugs6.perl.org

=head2 Data::Dumper and tied objects

Slaven Rezic asked whether Data::Dumper should support tied objects. Brian
Ingerson answered that no, his opinion is that the tiedness should lay
outside of serialization.

Slaven also provided a new test file for Data::Dumper, containing some
TODO tests for a bug he just found. Apparently this is a rather obscure
bug, which I<seems only be triggered if Freeze/Thaw is used in the pure
perl version of Dump (Dumpxs works fine) and the object type changes.>

    http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=200209091755.g89HthuZ019314%40vran.herceg.de
    http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=200209091933.g89JX8vS022479%40vran.herceg.de

=head2 C<-DLEAKTEST> doesn't work

It has been reported (bug #17197) that perl 5.8.0 cannot be built with
threads and with the CPP symbol C<LEAKTEST> (once referred to in perlrun.)
Andy Dougherty mentioned that I<LEAKTEST didn't really work in any case,
and has not really been supported since before version 5.000.>
Nick Ing-Simmons and H.Merijn Brand voted for its removal.

    http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=rt-17197-37307.7.03322615920982%40bugs6.perl.org

=head2 Testing for magic

The discussion on v-strings from the previous week continued. The new
v-strings, if you don't remember, are scalars with 'V'-magic attached to
them. So, to test whether a given scalar is a v-string, we should test
whether it has 'V' magic. It's possible with XS or by using the B module,
but that's not actually very straightforward, so John Peacock proposed a
patch to add a function isvstring() to Scalar::Util.

    http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20020911123320.J2793%40dansat.data-plan.com

=head2 Syntax incompatibility with the C<//> operator

Rafael Garcia-Suarez found that

    sub f ($) { } f $x / 2;

wasn't anymore accepted by bleadperl. This was due to a parsing
incompatibility introduced by the new C<//> operator. This was
corrected, but the following construct is still a syntax error with
bleadperl :

    print $fh //;

    http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20020912151731.1076c91b.rgarcia%40hexaflux.com

=head2 In brief

After some gcc-ism being tracked down, ANSI C compilers are now able to
compile Nicholas Clark's copy-on-write code.

H.Merijn Brand has now write access to the Perforce repository where the
source for bleadperl is kept.

Josh b Jore noticed (bug #17088) that once a scalar variable is
local()ised, its pos() is lost.

Perl 5.8.0 can't be built on NetBSD/alpha with an older gcc, due to a bug
in gcc's optimizer. The fix is to pick up a newest compiler, or to compile
without optimization. Jarkko Hietaniemi provided a patch to the hintsfile
for NetBSD to check this. (Bug #17174.)

chromatic proposed a patch that reimplements AutoLoader::import() to avoid
a dependency on the Exporter module. Not applied, it was flawed. So he
proposed a second (better) patch, that waits for its turn in the queue.

Alain Barbet provided a impressive stack of smoke tests (various
combinations of Cygwin, Solaris, Linux, *BSD, on Sparc, PPC and x86!)

Following a bug report (#17208) by Vincent Lefevre to fix small typos in
the perlmodlib man page, I found that it included an incomplete list of
modules. Fixed.

C<Cwd::chdir('.')> apparently hangs on Solaris. Bug #17227, reported by
Akim Demaille, and on which nobody commented.

Brian Korver reported that the alarm() system call is broken with perl
5.8.0, at least on FreeBSD, when mixed with the gethostbyname() system
call. See bug #17341. This is probably caused by the new safe signals
in perl 5.8.0 (see the corresponding entry in perldelta).

=head2 About this summary

This summary brought to you by Rafael Garcia-Suarez. It's also available
via a mailing list, which subscription address is
F<perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org>. Comments, additions and
low-temperature flames welcome.
