=head1 This Week on perl5-porters (23-29 December 2002)

Not even Christmas and other holidays will stop the Perl 5 Porters.
Find below the weekly list of issues, and it's not shorter than usual :
lexical scoping questions, portability concerns, refcounting, and other
bugs and fixes.

=head2 Implicit localisation of $DIGIT variables

Martien Verbruggen notes that the $DIGIT variables are implicitly
localized to the scope of a while() loop, when the regular expression that
sets them is in the loop condition. This doesn't appear to be consistent
with the documentation, that says that a while() statement never
implicitly localises any variables. Moreover, this behavior doesn't occur
with if() and foreach(). Nicholas Clark comments that the while() loop
condition seems to be scoped within the block. Probably the only thing
that's needed is a documentation fix. Bug #19236.

    http://archive.develooper.com/perl5-porters@perl.org/msg90096.html

Maybe that's also related to Strange Regexp Scoping Bug #19388, reported
by Ton Hospel.

    http://archive.develooper.com/perl5-porters@perl.org/msg90218.html

=head2 Defining lexical aliases

David Nicol asked whether the syntax C<\$alias = \$value> could be made to
work to define aliases, including some form of C<my \$alias = \$value> for
lexically scoped aliases.

Yitzchak Scott-Thoennes proposed to introduce the Perl 6
binding operator C<my $alias := $value> instead. (Oddly enough this
particular syntax isn't currently rejected by Perl 5.)

Nobody proposed a plan to implement this, but looking at Devel::LexAlias
(or another alias module) might give some ideas to start with.

    http://archive.develooper.com/perl5-porters@perl.org/msg90213.html

=head2 %INC on Windows

Chip Salzenberg provided a patch for bug #19213, reported last week, to
canonicalize the names of require()d files on Windows. This way, duplicate
entries in %INC are avoided (e.g. C<Foo/Bar.pm> and C<Foo\\Bar.pm>). The
discussion then derived to case-insensitive filesystems, Unicode
filenames, and other cans that presumably contain worms.

    http://archive.develooper.com/perl5-porters@perl.org/msg90229.html

=head2 EOL agnosticism

Jarkko Hietaniemi proposed a draft patch to add I<EOL agnosticism> to
perl, i.e. to allow LF, CR and CRLF line-endings in perl scripts. After
some discussion, it was decided that his proposed implementation was not
good enough, and that using a source filtering mechanism would be better.

    http://archive.develooper.com/perl5-porters@perl.org/msg90253.html

=head2 Iterator classes and memory leaks

Bug report #18581 led to an interesting discussion. As Hugo summarized it,
the problem is with the postincrement statement C<$bar = $foo++>, where
$foo is an object with the C<++> operator overloaded, and with a copy
constructor that simply returns the original object itself. What happens
then is that perl copies $foo, increments it, and returns the copy, which
is itself copied (via the copy constructor) to $bar. At some point there
is some dangling copy somewhere, leading to a memory leak, or (more
precisely) to an object that will be destroyed later than it should.

    http://archive.develooper.com/perl5-porters@perl.org/msg89230.html

=head2 In brief

Ton Hospel reported that affecting a number to the special variable C<$\>
doesn't work as it should (bug #19330). Rafael Garcia-Suarez, who has to
be blamed for this bug, provided a patch.

Blair Zajac reported a case of intermittent segmentation fault when the
newest Storable module is used with signals handlers and under the perl
profiler. Scary. Bug #19385.

Michael G Schwern released a new alpha version of ExtUtils::MakeMaker,
6.06_02. Work on the Windows, MacPerl and VMS ports is still needed.

Nathan Torkington tried to build perl on FreeBSD 5.0-RC2, and found that
some adjustements to the FreeBSD hints file and/or to the Configure script
are needed.

Jim Cromie wrote a script to harvest all error and warning messages from
the perl sources, including some of the standard modules, and to compare
them to what's actually in perldiag.pod. Now he has to sort out the
results :)

Mark Mielke and Nicholas Clark suggested to use the __builtin_expect()
feature of gcc 3.x to help it to optimize perl for speed.

=head2 About this summary

This summary brought to you by Rafael Garcia-Suarez, back to work. Read it
on F<http://use.perl.org/> and/or via a mailing list, which subscription
address is F<perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org>. Comments and corrections
are, as always, welcome.
