=head1 This Week on perl5-porters (14-20 October 2002)

This week, folks, I've written a low-fat summary. Not that I'm especially
tired, but the bulk of messages in perl5-porters were bug reports and
small fixes, and not really summarizable discussions. This makes arguably
the summary more concise, but not less interesting, do I hope.

=head2 charnames patch follow-up

H.Merijn Brand submitted a new version of his patch that enhances the
C<charnames> pragma to allow user-defined aliases. Not yet applied. Your
summarizer noticed that loading the files that define the aliases via
require() instead of do() would be an improvement, but unfortunately it
appeared that require() is always forced to be called in scalar context,
(for an unclear reason), which makes this solution not applicable.

    http://archive.develooper.com/perl5-porters@perl.org/msg88068.html
    http://archive.develooper.com/perl5-porters@perl.org/msg88177.html

=head2 How to leak scalars with threads

Marc Shapiro noticed (bug #17964) that using the Switch module in a
multi-threaded program triggers a C<Scalars leaked: 1> error message.
Elizabeth Mattijsen replied that there are currently many ways to produce
this message, one of them being to do I<funky stuff> in BEGIN blocks.

    http://archive.develooper.com/perl5-porters@perl.org/msg88091.html

=head2 In brief

Steve Grazzini submitted a patch (bug #17830) to make the three argument
form of open() behave correctly when the mode argument is C<< <&= >> (i.e.
open a file descriptor via number). Applied.

Bug #17892 is about mkdir() not internally removing trailing slashes from
directory names. This makes mkdir() fail in this case on NetBSD (and
possibly other BSD variants). This was fixed by Slaven Rezic.

Michael G Schwern noticed that prototype() doesn't warn in void context.
This was fixed by Rafael Garcia-Suarez (bug #17933).

Nicholas Clark reported that a tied STDERR doesn't catch lexical warning
messages. Bug #17934, still pending, on which nobody commented.

Stéphane Payrard submitted a patch to the IO module, to deprecate the form
C<use IO> without an import list, and to document what goes in this import
list (that is, the names of the modules in the C<IO::> namespace to be
loaded.) Applied.

Ilya Sandler reported that clearing a large hash may be very slow (bug
#17971). As Andreas J. Koenig found out, this is a malloc() bug,
reproducible with libc-2.2.5, but not with libc-2.3.* that provides a new
implementation of malloc().

Graham Crookham reported that with perl 5.8.0, I<AUTOLOAD is failing to
get called for sub calls of the form Xxxx->new when the class Xxxx has
never been seen before> (bug #17967). This behavior differs from perl
5.6.1. Nobody commented.

Marty Pauley provided a patch for Class::Struct to allow declaration of a
structure via the C<use Class::Struct> statement, with an implicit class
name. He also wondered I<why Class::Struct doesn't allow its structures to
have an @ISA>. Nobody seemed to remember.

Gavin Estey reported that a test for Locale::Codes failed for him when
compiling perl 5.8.0. This bug was already known and fixed, but it's not
harmful to repeat the cause here, in case some of my gentle readers run
into the same problem : he was using an UTF8 locale, which the buggy test
wasn't handling properly.

H.Merijn Brand applied his chainsaw-patch to remove the old 5005-threads.
Further reviewing and adjustments are probably needed (but apparently no
regression was introduced.)

Ton Hospel reported a case of regex overoptimization (bug #18019), which
was promptly fixed by Hugo.

Perl 5 turned eight years old.

=head2 About this summary

This summary brought to you by Rafael Garcia-Suarez, who began to use Perl
less than eight years ago. It's also available via a mailing list, which
subscription address is F<perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org>. Comments and
corrections are, as always, welcome.
