=head1 This Week on perl5-porters (28th October / 3rd November 2002)

This week's summary features UTF8 and locale incompatibility problems,
discovered on RedHat 8, but pertaining to UTF8 locales ; various bugs fixed ;
various bugs discovered ; the C<//> operator reappearing shortly ; and a
new way to consider goto harmful.

=head2 Problems with RedHat 8

Paul Marquess reported that the test suite for Compress::Zlib fails on the
newest RedHat 8.0. This problem is due to a string holding binary data
which, once written to a file, gets apparently corrupted.

Gurusamy Sarathy pointed out that marking the output filehandle with
binmode() solves the problem. In fact, RedHat 8's default configuration
apparently use UTF-8 locales, which are recognized by perl 5.8.0. Gurusamy
quoted the appropriate paragraph from the perldelta manpage for perl 5.8.0 :

=over

=item

Note for code authors: if you want to enable your users to use UTF-8 as
their default encoding but in your code still have eight-bit I/O streams
(such as images or zip files), you need to explicitly open() or binmode()
with C<:bytes> (see perlfunc/open and perlfunc/binmode), or you can just
use binmode(FH) (nice for pre-5.8.0 backward compatibility).

=back

Tom Horsley added that there are probably additional bugs in RedHat 8.0
Unicode handling, judging from mysterious coredumps from system libraries.

Finally, Jarkko Hietaniemi proposed a patch to fix UTF-8 enabling via
locales. The LANGUAGE environment variable should not be used (as it is in
5.8.0) to enable UTF-8.

    http://www.perldoc.com/perl5.8.0/pod/perldelta.html#PerlIO-is-Now-The-Default
    http://archive.develooper.com/perl5-porters@perl.org/msg88580.html

=head2 AUTOLOAD subroutines from undefined stashes

Jan Dubois reported a bug on AUTOLOADed subroutines (bug #18113, also
reported previously as #17967) : AUTOLOAD is not called on packages that
haven't been encountered by perl before. This used to work with perl
5.6.1, but is broken with perl 5.8.0. Gurusamy Sarathy provided a fix.

    http://archive.develooper.com/perl5-porters@perl.org/msg88519.html

=head2 goto considered harmful in __DIE__ handlers

Peter Scott reported an interesting behavior : when using a magical
C<goto> to exit from a __DIE__ handler, one could generate an infinite
loop :

    $SIG{__DIE__} = sub { goto &foo };
    sub foo { print "foo\n"; die "rethrow" }
    die "throw";

Whether it's actually a bug is open to discussion.

    http://archive.develooper.com/perl5-porters@perl.org/msg88578.html

=head2 B::* adjustments

Yitzchak Scott-Thoennes remarked that B::Concise doesn't handle well the
new C<//> and C<//=> operators (bug #18175). Stephen McCamant sent a fix,
but a similar problem on other B:: modules (at least B::Terse) should be
fixed as well.

    http://archive.develooper.com/perl5-porters@perl.org/msg88595.html

=head2 Tied hashes in boolean context

Bug #18186 was already reported as #17718 : one can't test the emptyness
of a tied hash by using it in scalar context. Yitzchak points out that
it's difficult to fix, and explains why. Mark-Jason Dominus proposed an
alternative solution (a HASHSIZE method), which was already suggested a
while back by Rick Delaney, and rejected at this time.

    http://archive.develooper.com/perl5-porters@perl.org/msg88626.html

=head2 In brief

Autrijus Tang reported that uc(), lc() and ucfirst() don't appear to work
correctly on the right side of C<s///e> expressions, applied on UTF-8
strings. Strangely, this bug (#18107) doesn't affect lcfirst().

Mark Pease found a problem on offset calculations in regular expressions
(bug #18154) and offered a patch.

Nicholas Clark proposed to replace the current implementation of the
makefile target C<regen_headers> by a perl script, which he provided.

Rafael Garcia-Suarez asked why DESTROY is called in scalar context (and
proposed a patch to have it called in void context), and faced Warnock's
dilemma.

Abhijit Menon-Sen and Slaven Rezic fixed a problem with the C<..>
operator, that didn't handle well some cases where the operands were
strings (C<"-4".."0"> and C<"-4\n".."0\n">). (bugs #18114 and #18165.)

=head2 About this summary

This summary brought to you by Rafael Garcia-Suarez. It's
also available via a mailing list, which subscription address is
F<perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org>. Comments and corrections are, as
always, welcome.
