=head1 This Week on perl5-porters (8-14 July 2002)

This week, the P5P report features the Great Module Renaming ; the Second
Great Module Renaming ; a Couple Of Bugs, old and new ; and, finally, Perl
5.8.0 RC 3 released to the world.

=head2 More on PerlIO::Via

On monday morning, the version of C<MIME::QuotedPrint> included with Perl
still provided a few methods (namely PUSHED, FILL, WRITE and FLUSH) that
added to it the ability to be used as a PerlIO layer. Elizabeth Mattijsen,
hunting bloat, submitted a patch to remove these methods. Noticing that
these were used in the test for C<PerlIO::Via>, and in some documentation as
code examples, Jarkko decided to borgify Elizabeth CPAN's module,
C<PerlIO::Via::QuotedPrint>, which is essentially the above PerlIO methods
put in a separate namespace.

http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2002-07/msg00199.html

On the path of doing this namespace migration, a PerlIO bug reappeared :
C<< open($fh, "<:Via(foo)", "file") >> not returning false on failure. It
turned out that this was a bug in the C<:stdio> pseudo-layer. It was promptly
corrected by Nick Ing-Simmons.

=head2 Case issues in PerlIO::*

Continuing on the C<PerlIO::Via> topic, Elizabeth Mattijsen asked why the
second part of C<PerlIO::encoding> was lowercase, whereas C<PerlIO::Via> and
C<PerlIO::Scalar> where uppercase.

This was obviously a good question. A consensus was found quite rapidly :
all core IO layers should have all-lowercase names. Thus, C<PerlIO::Via> (and
its submodules C<PerlIO::Via::*>) moved to C<PerlIO::via> (note the lowercase
'v'), and C<PerlIO::Scalar> to C<PerlIO::scalar>.

http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2002-07/msg00201.html

=head2 :pop pseudo-layer

During the previous discussion, Nick Ing-Simmons noticed that is was
impossible to pop an IO layer from within Perl. Thus he added a C<:pop>
experimental pseudo-layer, that does just that.

http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2002-07/msg00458.html

=head2 Backporting Data::Dumper to CPAN

Ilya Martynov tried to backport RC1's C<Data::Dumper> to perl 5.6.1. He
found out that some tests were failing, because the internal hashing
algorithm used by perl has changed, and thus hash keys were not returned
in the same order. The trick should be to have version-specific tests, or
to use some more clever way to verify the results. Anyway, Ilya is now
with Gurusamy Sarathy co-maintainer of C<Data::Dumper>, and will be able
to upload new versions to CPAN.

http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2002-07/msg00317.html

=head2 DESTROYing blessed code refs

Simon Cozens found that the C<DESTROY> method was not called when blessed
code references go out of scope. Nobody replied, and it's still not clear
whether this is a bug.

http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2002-07/msg00235.html

=head2 C<defined $$foo>

Elizabeth Mattijsen noticed that

    use strict 'refs';
    our $foo = 'bar';
    if (defined $$foo) { ... }

was valid perl code, and wondered whether this was an undocumented
feature. After some discussion, it was decided that this was actually a
bug, but the kind of bug that can wait until after 5.8.0 -- it's
non-critical, and it's present in 5.6.x.

http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2002-07/msg00359.html

=head2 A couple of bugs

Abigail reported a couple of bugs. The first was a complaint about
C</(?{...})?/> not being allowed. This triggered a terse comment by Hugo
about how he wants to enhance the regexp engine during the 5.9 development
track.

The second bug was about local()-izing an C<$#array> variable not working
correctly (for some value of "correctly"). (I think that this bug was
already reported in the past, but I didn't find it.) Anyway, if we want to
make this work, the semantics of this construct should be precisely
defined. This goes in the to-do list for 5.9.

The first bug: http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2002-07/msg00482.html

The second bug: http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2002-07/msg00484.html

=head2 More module case issues : root namespace for thread utility modules

Elizabeth Mattijsen was also busy on the ithreads front. She uploaded to
CPAN a thread-pool module. The first version of it was called
C<threads::farm> (now it's C<Thread::Pool>). Johan Vromans noted the
all-lowercase name, quite inappropriate for a module. It's worth noting
that this triggered the Second Great Renaming of the week : the thread
utility modules now live in the C<Thread::> namespace. The thread
pragmatic modules (C<threads> and C<threads::shared>) keep their lowercase
name, in conformance with the general naming conventions; but
C<threads::shared::queue> and C<threads::shared::semaphore> now become
respectively C<Thread::Queue> and C<Thread::Semaphore>.

http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2002-07/msg00570.html

=head2 Finally, RC3

Jarkko released RC3 to the world, but you already know that. He said also :

I<The post-RC3-plan is no damn code patches (or additions), the possible
exceptions being firefighting by me (Unicode), NI-S (perlio), Arthur
(ithreads), or Hugo (regexen).>

and :

I<Timeframe for the 5.8.0 final: Thursday.>

(this last word being of course subject to Murphy's law.) (It also means
that you have to quickly download and test RC3 on your favorite platforms
before it's too late...)
