=head1 RFCs

Larry Wall will decide the changes to make for perl6 based on our
suggestions.  To make life easy for him, we should put some effort
into our suggestions.  RFCs are intended to be focus discussion on
something that will be useful to Larry when he makes his decisions.

This format was last changed July 31, 2000.

=head1 Format

RFCs are written in POD.  L<rfc-sample.pod> is a sample.  The
important sections are: TITLE, VERSION, ABSTRACT, DESCRIPTION,
IMPLEMENTATION, and REFERENCES.  An optional section is STATUS.

A description of each section follows:

=head2 TITLE

One line, describing the proposed new feature or change.

=head2 VERSION

Metadata information: Maintainer, Date, Version, Mailing List, and
Number.

=over 4

=item *

Maintainer.  The name and email address of the person currently
maintaining the RFC.

=item *

Date.  The date of the most recent release.

=item *

Version.  An integer version number.  First version is 1.

=item *

Mailing List.  The mailing list on which discussion about this feature
or change has taken place.

=item *

Number.  Unique RFC number, assigned by the librarian.

=back

Here is an example:

  =head1 VERSION

    Maintainer: Nathan Torkington <gnat@frii.com>
    Date: 30 Jul 2000
    Version: 2
    Mailing List: perl6-internals
    Number: 1

=head2 ABSTRACT

One or two paragraph summary of the problem and proposed solutions,
or feature and probable implementations.

=head2 DESCRIPTION

Detailed discussion of the problem or new feature.

=head2 IMPLEMENTATION

Discussion of the possible implementations.  This doesn't have to
be completely defined down to the C<char *>, instead enough to show
that it can be done.

=head2 REFERENCES

A list of pointers to other documentation relevant to the topic.  This
could be other RFCs, internet standards, existing Perl or
operating-system documentation, books, and so on.

=head2 STATUS

Once an RFC is retired, the STATUS section is used to say why and how
the RFC is dead.

=head1 Submitting

Mail the RFC to C<perl6-rfc@perl.org>.  It will be assigned a
number if it doesn't already have one, then posted to the
C<perl6-announce> mailing list, as well as the list in the C<Mailing
list> metadata.  They will also be archived at C<http://dev.perl.org>.

