=head1 Combust Installation

=head3 Requirements

You need Apache 1.3.x with mod_perl 1.2.x, Perl 5.8 and the CPAN
modules from the following section.  Combust can be installed and run
as any user. (As long as it doesn't bind to port 80.)  We recommend
using a front-end Apache2 proxy on port 80.

If the sites you work on use caching you will also need to run a
MySQL server.

The scripts are currently hardcoded to find the Apache with mod_perl
statically linked in /home/perl/apache1/bin/httpd and perl in
/home/perl/bin/perl.

If you run a Linux installation not unlike RedHat 7.x you might be
able to use our perl/apache/subversion installation from perl.org.
Contact ask or robert @ perl.org for rsync instructions.

=head3 Install modules from CPAN

/home/perl/bin/perl -MCPAN -e shell

	Apache::DBI
	Apache::Reload
	Apache::Request
	Bundle::LWP
	Config::Simple
	DBD::mysql
	DBI
	Date::Parse
	Exception::Class
	Mail::Internet
	Pod::Simple
	Template
	Text::Template
	Time::HiRes
	URI::Find
        Template::Plugin::PodSimple

Not all sites require all the above modules, but its easier for us to
list the superset.

You can also C<install Bundle::Combust> to get a bundle that contains
all the necessary modules.

=head3 Apache2 Proxy setup

The most common mod_perl setup is to have a light proxy in front of
the mod_perl setup.  Using Apache 2.x for the proxy is somewhat
simpler than using 1.3 because 2.0 has the "ProxyPreserveHost"
feature.  B<If for development you just want to run Combust on a high
port and not have it available via port 80 you can skip the proxy
setup.>

Add something like the following to your Apache 2.0 httpd.conf file:

  ProxyVia On
  ProxyPreserveHost On

  <VirtualHost *>
    ServerName c.askask.com
    ServerAlias *.c.askask.com
    RewriteEngine on
    RewriteRule (.*) http://localhost:8225$1 [P]
  </VirtualHost>

This example is what I use on my development server where all the
sites are configured under the c.askask.com domain and the Combust
server runs on port 8225 (configured in combust.conf).


=head3 Create a user and get the goods

  adduser combust
  su - combust
  rm .bashrc

    svn co https://svn.develooper.com/combust/branches/stable .

  __OR__

    svn co https://svn.develooper.com/combust/trunk .

  svn co https://svn.perl.org/perl.org/docs

  # setup configuration from the sample conf
  cp combust.conf.sample combust.conf
  emacs combust.conf  

  CBROOT=`pwd` ./bin/run_httpd

The read-only username and password for the svn server are both
"guest". [This is not true on svn.perl.org.]

/combust/branches/stable is usually an older version of Combust in
less flux.  The /combust/trunk version is the one currently in
development, often with new features, support for more platforms and
so on, but also with newer and more interesting bugs.

You might want to put bin/cron_hourly into the combust users crontab.
In any case then it should be executed at least once.

You can test the validity of your combust.conf, httpd.tmpl, and site
templates by running C<bin/make_configs>

B<Note:> You don't have to run combust as a seperate user, but it
helps keep things separate.  For development, you can stick it almost
anywhere.. one install we know about lives in C<~/projects/newweb/>.

=head3 Update Combust

You should run "svn update" once in a while to update your copy of
combust.  When you install you can install the latest development
version instead of the latest stable version by using

  svn co https://svn.develooper.com/combust/trunk .

You can use "svn switch" to switch back and forth. For example to
switch to the latest stable version you would use

  svn switch https://svn.develooper.com/combust/branches/stable


=head2 Use a different document root on the fly

Adding "?root=user" to a url will make Combust use the
~user/docs/path as the document root when loading templates.  For
example then I'd use

  http://site.c.askask.com/?root=ask

to load templates from ~ask/docs/live on my development server. 

Combust sets a cookie to keep using the new root until told otherwise
(by for example setting root=/ to go back to the default).


=head2 How to add another site

=over 4

=item Add to combust.conf

Add a new section like the following to $CBROOT/combust.conf

  sites = newsite, oldsite, othersite 

  [newsite]
  servername = newsite.example.com


=item Add a section to httpd.tmpl

See the existing configurations there for examples. You most likely
want to set it up to use the Combust::Control::Basic controller.

=item Add documents

Add the directory docs/live/newsite/ and drop your documents in there.
Setup a default page style etc in docs/live/newsite/tpl/defaults.  See
some of the old site configurations for examples.

=back

=head1 Database Setup

CREATE TABLE `combust_cache` ( 
    `id` varchar(250) character set latin1 collate latin1_bin NOT NULL default '',
    `type` varchar(128) character set latin1 collate latin1_bin NOT NULL default '',
    `created` timestamp NOT NULL default CURRENT_TIMESTAMP on update CURRENT_TIMESTAMP, 
    `purge_key` varchar(64) character set latin1 collate latin1_bin default NULL,
    `data` mediumblob NOT NULL,
    `metadata` mediumblob,
    `serialized` tinyint(1) NOT NULL default '0',
    `expire` datetime NOT NULL default '0000-00-00 00:00:00',
     PRIMARY KEY  (`id`,`type`),  KEY `expire_idx` (`expire`),  KEY `purge_idx` (`purge_key`)
) ENGINE=InnoDB DEFAULT CHARSET=utf8;

=head2 Copyright

Combust is copyright 2003-2004 Ask Bjørn Hansen and Develooper LLC.  See
the LICENSE file in the main combust directory for the full details.

