
=head1 Combust Installation on macOS

$Id$

=head2 Overview

One of the biggest complaints we get about Combust is that it is hard
to install.  I've never believed this, and have decided to put this
"myth" to bed for once and for all.

To prove my point, I shall demonstrate how to install Combust in less
than an hour, without a network connection.  (And on battery, but that
really has nothing to do with anything else.)

=head2 Preparation

This installation was done on a PowerBook G4, running macOS 10.4.3.  The
names have not been changed to protect the innocent.  Some file
locations may be slightly different on Linux.

Physically, the documented installation was performed in Terminal 7 of
Los Angeles International airport, while waiting for a plane.  The
documentation was written from seat 21F on the aforementioned plane,
enroute to New York's John F. Kennedy airport.  (For reasons the
author doesn't understand, we've taken a *very* southernly route --
likely to avoid storms over the Rockies.)

The Powerbook has had nothing special installed on it.  (It does have
a barebones Fink, but nothing that should affect the installation.)
No special perl modules have been installed.  The development kit _is_
installed.

Only one operation must be performed as root.  More on that later.
(Of course, you _can_ do everything as root, but my personal taste is
not to do this, especially on highly managed systems.)

So, to recap, we are going to use:

=over 4

=item * The system perl (/usr/bin/perl)

=item * The system apache (/usr/sbin/httpd)

=item * The mod_perl that comes with the system apache

=item * Perl modules installed in the user's local directory (~/Library/Perl)

=back

And the final preparation step is to make sure your system can access
a CPAN mirror via the CPAN shell.  On this notebook, I've synced a
copy of minicpan to ~/projects/MINICPAN, and configured CPAN.pm to use
that as my source by executing the following in the CPAN shell:

   o conf urllist set file:///Users/rspier/projects/MINICPAN/
   o conf commit

If you have a network connection and have already configured the CPAN
shell to use a remote mirror, that's ok too.  (General configuration
of the CPAN.pm module is outside the scope of this article -- but I
generally just let it autoconfigure.)

In order to install perl modules under your home directory, you need
to make two configuration changes.  First, tell CPAN.pm by executing
the following:

  perl -MCPAN -eshell
  o conf makepl_arg 'LIB=~/Library/Perl PREFIX=~'
  o conf commit

This will pass the specified arguments to Makefile.pl, which tells it
to put module files under F<~/Library/Perl>, and everything else under
the root directory.  This means you may end up with a F<man> and
F<bin> directory under your home directory.  (Although at least one
module I installed decided to create a F<usr/bin/> -- but this isn't
important for Combust.  The arguments are documented in 
L<ExtUtils::MakeMaker>.

Now, modify your .bashrc file to include:

   export PERL5LIB=$HOME/Library/Perl

If you're not using bash as your shell, figure out the equivalent.
The PERL5LIB environment variable is documented in L<perlvar>.

(Also run it on the command line to get it put into your current
environment.)  

If you don't do the above steps, you'll need to execute the next
section as root, because the module installation process will attempt
to install into directories you don't own.

=head2 Installing Dependent Modules

Combust is dependent on lots of modules.  That's a fact.  Get over it.
Many of them aren't needed by the base Combust installation, but by
the perl.org site.  (And since that's likely what you're going to be
running, you need those modules.)

For your sanity, we've created a Bundle containing them all.  It makes
it pretty darn easy to get them all installed.  In the CPAN shell 
(C<perl -MCPAN -eshell>) run:

   install Bundle::Combust

And then wait.

It may take a while to install all the modules and their dependent
modules.  You may be prompted from time to time for permission to
install dependencies (unless you set C<o conf prerequisites_policy
follow>).  Some modules may also ask you questions.  You can
generally say no to most of the questions.

I had trouble with two modules: L<XML::Simple> and L<Yahoo::Search>.
The tests on the former were unhappy.  I performed a manual force
install.  The latter's tests are dependent on a network connection,
which sadly I didn't have at the time.

You can try and C<install Bundle::Combust> again to verify that all
the pieces are in place.  If any module doesn't install, you can
install it by hand.

=head2 Checkout Combust

Using subversion, checkout combust from:

  https://svn.develooper.com/combust/trunk

For test purposes I checked it out into ~/projects/combust

=head2 Simple Tests

Now, before we try a complicated site like perl.org, we're going to
test with a very barebones site (also known as "Trivial Example One").
This example is in the 'misc/examples/trivial' directory in your
combust checkout.

Set the following environment variables:

  export CBROOT=~/projects/combust
  export CBROOTLOCAL=~/projects/combust/misc/examples/trivial

(Obviously, if your combust checkout is somewhere else, change the
path.)

Now, lets modify $CBROOTLOCAL/combust.conf to look something like this:

  perl  = perl
  httpd = /usr/sbin/httpd
  apache_config = /etc/httpd
  port = 8555
  servername = combust.example.com

  sites = one

  [one]
  servername = one.combust
  siteadmin  = root@combust.example.com

Then, teach your computer about one.combust by editing the
F</etc/hosts> file.

Modify the localhost line to look something like this:

  127.0.0.1       localhost one.combust

Now, we can start combust.

  $ $CBROOT/bin/run_httpd

The scripts will generate and check the appropriate configuration
files and start apache.  Or, an error will appear.  Fix it.

Use curl or your web browser to visit http://one.combust:8555

You should see a message that says 'The time is now' followed by the
current time.

(Sidebar: The test site had a stupid typo causing a namespace issue,
which took 20 minutes to debug.  It shouldn't have, but airports
aren't always conducive to straightforward thinking.)

=head2 The Perl.org sites

Now that we have a test system that works, its time to get the full
system working.

Check out the perl.org doc tree from
L<https://svn.perl.org/perl.org/docs/> (this requires an
L<http://auth.perl.org/> identity and password) into a F<docs>
subdirectory of your combust installation.  If you don't like nested
checkouts, or are using a system such as svk that doesn't allow them,
you can place it elsewhere and symlink $CBROOT/docs -> wherever you
put it.  (Note: this is going to change in the future when the
perl.org sites are "isolated" from the main combust tree.)

Copy the F<combust.conf.sample> from the combust directory to
F<combust.conf> and edit it to look something like this:
 
  perl  = /usr/bin/perl
  httpd = /usr/sbin/httpd
  apache_config = /etc/httpd

  servername = combust.combust
  sites = www, qa
  port = 8230

  [www]
  servername = www.combust

  [qa]
  servername = qa.combust

=over 4

=item * Unset $CBROOTLOCAL or set it to the same value as $CBROOT.

=item * Add 'www.combust' and 'qa.combust' to the /etc/hosts file.

=item * Now, run $CBROOT/run_httpd to start apache.

=item * Visit http://www.combust:8230/ to see the fruits of our labors.

=back

All done!  (Almost.)

=head2 Further studies

Combust supports many configuration options, and you may want to use
some of them.  Look at the provided combust.conf.sample to see them.
Drop them in your own combust.conf and re-run C<$CBROOT/run_httpd> to
see the effect.

As of this writing, the perl.org docs directory contains the following sites:

  combust dbi dev ldap noc perl4lib qa sdl www debugger
  foundation learn parrotcode ponie rre shared xml

You can add another one to your installation by adding the appropriate
[site] section for it, and adding it to the sites list.

You may come upon pages that throw errors.  These are likely due to
missing modules or missing data files.  (Some of those modules are in
the Bundle::Combust::Extras bundle.)  The missing data files are often
downloaded rss files that go in $CBROOT/var/rss and are generally
downloaded by $CBROOT/bin/cron_hourly.  (Some of these blowups should
be fixed by TRY/CATCH blocks.)  You will also want to check the logs
under your ($CBROOT|$CBROOTLOCAL)/apache/logs directory.

Use the source code, please!  It's pretty simple, and may have the
answer to your problems.  Also, if you find a problem, we're very
happy to accept patches.  And if you can't figure it out -- ask.  We
have a combust-users (at) perl.org mailing list just for this purpose.

=head2 Things Intentionally Left Out

=over 4

=item *

XML::RSS is not part of Bundle::Combust (but it will be part of a
future version of Bundle::Combust::Extras.  It is dependent on
XML::Parser, which is dependent on expat, which requires extra hoops
to jump through on OS X.

   perl Makefile.PL LIB=~/Library/Perl PREFIX=~ \
    EXPATLIBPATH=/usr/X11R6/lib EXPATINCPATH=/usr/X11R6/include

RSS feeds (used to show lists of news items and such) won't work
without this.

=item *

You can (of course) use a different perl or apache, if you want.  The
apache must have mod_perl 1.x compiled in.  The apache and matching
perl can be specified in your combust.conf.

=item *

You'll note this is running on a high port (not 80, which requires
running as root.)  Currently redirects won't work.  If you put:

  external_port=80

in your combust.conf, this will fix redirects.

We are considering changing the code to not default to port 80.

=item *

Why do redirects default to port 80?  Because we designed Combust to
run behind a proxy (for performance reasons, among others).  But for
development, that adds an unecessary layer.  I run Combust behind a
proxy on my desktop (because I have many domains I want to answer on
port 80, some Combustified, others not.  But on my laptop, it's
unnecessary.

=back

=head1 AUTHOR

Robert Spier
