
=head1 TITLE

Now What?

=head1 AUTHOR

Robert

=head1 SUMMARY

So you've installed combust, and now you want to make or modify some
websites.  How do you start?

=head1 BASICS

Combust is based on Template Toolkit
(L<http://www.template-toolkit.org>).  All TT directives can be used
in Combust.  (With the exception of any that have been disabled for
security purposes.)

The TT language has basic flow control and the ability to modify and process data.  

=head2 Page Concepts

There are three different kinds of document in Combust.

=over 4

=item *

page

pages are where the content lives.  they contain HTML and TT
directives.  Some of these directives may set variables that are used
by the style document

=item *

style

style documents are the outer templates.  they generally contain the
<html> </html> tags, the <head> block, a page header and footer.  They
control the macro-layout of a page.  they often use variables set on
the page.

style documents live in the $SITE/tpl/style/ directory

they are specified by C<[% page.style = "stylename.html" %]>

global styles live in shared/tpl/style

=item *

component

a component is to a page as a page is to a style.  Generally it's
something like a navigation bar, or something else that is used in
multiple places.  (Kind of like a subroutine.)

component documents generally live in the tpl/ directory

=back

  ----------------------------
  | <title>[%page.title%]    |
  |   </title>               |    --- page style (template) document
  |                          |     
  | #####   ***************  |    ### sidebar component
  | #####   *             *  |
  | #####   *             *  |    *** actual page ("foo.html")
  | #####   *             *  |
  | #####   *             *  |
  | #####   *             *  |
  | #####   *             *  |
  | #####   *             *  |
  | #####   *             *  |
  | #####   *             *  |
  | #####   *             *  |
  | #####   *             *  |
  | #####   *             *  |
  | #####   *             *  |
  | #####   ***************  |
  |                          |
  |                          |
  |   footer                 |
  ----------------------------

The default page style for a site can be set in C<$SITE/tpl/defaults>.
That file also contains variables that will be set on every page.

=head1 Default Styles

=over 4

=item *

bare.html

This style doesn't actually do anything.  Nothing will be added,
subtracted, or removed from the page.

=item *

default.html

This style is used by many perl.org pages.

Important variables are page.title, page.site, page.sidebar, page.footer

=item *

perl-directory.html

This style is used for index pages on www.perl.org

=back

You can also create your own custom styles.  Base them off an existing one.

=head1 On Style

Please keep your HTML as simple as possible and use the style-template
for as much of the layout as possible.  You can use TT variables ane
BLOCKs to position things.  (See how C<page.sidebar> works.)

Eliminate redundancy in the content pages.

Use CSS as much as possible.  If the perl.org stylesheet doesn't work
for you, you can create your own or extend the perl.org one by
including it into your own.

Avoid C<FONT> tags and embedded C<STYLE=> attributes.  Do not use
excessive tables.  Use semantic tags when possible.  Aim for content
over pretty.

Remember that pages named C<something.pod> are accessible as C<something.html> which can simplify things.

=head1 On Development and Comitting...

Combust is hosted out of Subversion (L<http://subversion.tigris.org>).
We like subversion, but we're not as used to it as we are CVS.  The
concept behind the Combust working model is you make and test changes
in your local development copy on your local server.  When you're
ready (and satisfied that they have been tested), you check it in and
it propogates to the live site.  

Do not check in every single one word change, to see it on the live
site.  This will make us very unhappy.

Right now, the documentation is a little weak.  The best way to learn
is to look at examples.
