=head1 NAME

p5pfaq - The perl 5 porters FAQ

=head1 About Perl 5 Porters (p5p)

=head2 Who are the porters?

The porters are the group of volunteers who develop Perl 5, working on
any aspect of Perl, including code, testing, and documentation. There
is no formal membership and anyone can participate, working as much as
they desire and contributing what they can.

Initially, the name signified the group of people who ported the Perl
5 codebase to new platforms. The name has stuck around despite Perl
taking over almost every platform people care to run it on.

=head2 ...and the list?

The I<perl5-porters@perl.org> mailing list is, briefly, for all topics
related to the development of the Perl 5 language and the perl 5
interpreter. It's for reporting and fixing bugs, working towards the
next version of perl 5, and improving the overall quality of the Perl
5 language.

=head2 What else goes on the list?

The list receives a number of automatic emails. These include reports
RT (L<http://rt.perl.org>), smoke test failure reports, and messages
from the C<perlthanks> utility (which we encourage you to use).

=head2 What is the list not for?

The list is for the development of the perl codebase. If it's not related
to developing the codebase, it probably doesn't belong on the list. For 
example, these thing should not be on the list:

    * Announcements about events related to Perl
    * Questions about programming Perl
    * Questions covered in the Perl FAQ
    * Spam

=head2 Are there any rules?

There are not many rules. However, Larry's advice from L<perlstyle>
apply just as well here as it does to Perl programming:

    * Be consistent
    * Be nice

The established medium for messages is plain text. If your email client
wants to send things in HTML, please try and discipline it.

=head2 What is "Rule 1"?

There are actually two rules:

    1. Larry is always by definition right about how Perl should behave.
    2. Larry is allowed to change his mind about any matter at a later date, regardless of whether he previously invoked Rule 1.

Larry Wall is a "benevolent dictator", meaning he mostly lets development
progress without interference, but in the rare cases where people cannot
agree, everyone agrees that Larry is the final authority. When someone
invokes "Rule 1", they are saying "Larry has decided, and that's how it
is going to be".

=head2 Is there a web archive?

Yes, there is, and it's at
L<http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/>.

=head2 perl5-porters is too big! Is there a digest?

If you want to receive all the messages but batched into a single mail
per day, you can subscribe to <perl5-porters-digest@perl.org> instead;
send mail to <perl5-porters-digest-subscribe@perl.org>. Be warned that
replying to messages from the digest may end up messing up threading on
things like the web archive - at least set your outgoing Subject header
to the subject of the individual message you're replying to.

=head1 List Administrivia

=head2 Help! How do I unsubscribe?

Send mail to I<perl5-porters-unsubscribe@perl.org>, and await a response.
Once you reply to the response, you'll be unsubscribed.

If that doesn't work, find your subscription address - it'll be in the
C<Return-Path> header of any mails from p5p to you. If that's
God@example.com, send mail to
I<perl5-porters-unsubscribe-God=example.com@perl.org>.

=head2 I'm not subscribed - how do I subscribe?

Send mail to I<perl5-porters-subscribe@perl.org>.
To specify God@example.com as your subscription address, send mail
to I<perl5-porters-subscribe-God=example.com@perl.org>.

=head2 How do I retrieve old messages?

Every message you get from perl5-porters will have an autogenerated
C<Return-Path> line. For instance:
I<perl5-porters-return-5523-God=example.com@perl.org>

The number in the middle, 5523, is the sequence number. To get the
message with a particular sequence number mailed to you, send mail to
I<perl5-porters-get.5523@perl.org>.

To a range of messages mailed to you in a digest, for instance, the
messages with sequence numbers from 4902 to 4950, send mail to
I<perl5-porters-get.4902-4950@perl.org>. You may request a maximum of
100 messages in a single digest.

More general help on list management can be retrieved by sending
a mail to I<perl5-porters-help@perl.org>.

=head2 How do I get this document?

Uh, you're reading it, aren't you? Oh well, life is strange. Send
mail to I<perl5-porters-faq@perl.org> and you'll receive a copy.

It's also in the I<perlfaq> Github repository at
L<http://github.com/briandfoy/perlfaq/blob/master/p5pfaq.pod>

=head1 Development questions

=head2 How do I report a bug?

First, are you sure it's a bug in Perl itself, not just a bug in your
code? Take the problem out of the context of your current program and
write a short test program to reproduce it - as short as you possibly
can. It's far easily to clearly detect a Perl bug if it's demonstrated
in 5 lines of code, rather than buried somewhere in the middle of a
500-line program.

Next, do we already know about it? Check with the bug ticketing system
at L<http://rt.perl.org/perlbug/>.

It's always worth getting someone else to look it over and confirm that
this really is a Perl bug, not just a thinko. If there's nobody around
to do that, consider asking on the I<comp.lang.perl.misc> or
I<comp.lang.perl.moderated> newsgroups.

Now, if you've really got a bug, type C<perlbug> at your prompt and
follow the instructions. It really helps us if you provide:

    * your demonstration code
    * the actual output you got, including warnings and error messages
    * what you think you should have got,
    * the part of the Perl documentation that makes you think that.

=head2 I want to get involved! What can I do?

Follow the list for a few weeks or months to get an idea of what goes
on, and see if anything pops up that you're interested in.
Occasionally someone will request a fix, and that's your chance!

If there doesn't appear to be anything you want to or are able to do,
have a look in your Perl source kit: you'll find the (outdated) file
I<pod/perltodo.pod>--some of the items there are being worked on, so
check back-issues of p5p. Look also at the end of the last
I<perldelta.pod>. Furthermore, you don't need to be an expert
programmer: B<anyone> can help with proof-reading, correcting and
expanding the documentation, for instance. There's certainly a place
for anyone who truly wants to get involved, and over time, you'll find
it.

You should also read I<perlhack.pod>, I<Porting/pumpkin.pod> and
I<Porting/patching.pod>--these will tell you how to create and submit
patches, as well as some more philosophical issues involved in patching
Perl. To summarise:

    * diff -ruN perl-current perl-patched > patch and append that
      verbatim, preferably not as an attachment, to your post.
    * Drastic changes to the syntax and/or operation of Perl are
      going to be viewed with a lot of suspicion. Start small.
    * Patches speak louder than words. Having ideas is good, but
      taking the time to implement them will improve their credibility.
    * At least one person will think your patch sucks. It's better to
      let the code stand on its own merits than get into arguments.

=head2 I've created a patch, but I'd like someone to check it over before I post it to the list. What should I do?

The first thing you should do is relax! We don't bite, and we appreciate
people who want to help. Just go for it. However, if you're still
worried about whether you should send the patch, email the relevant
pumpking for the area you're patching, or one of the referees.

=head2 Is Perl in CVS / SVN / Perforce / Git?

Perl is available inside a git repository. Git ( L<http://git-scm.com/> ) is a
popular, distributed and open-source version control system. To learn more
about checking out the Perl source using git see: 

L<http://perl5.git.perl.org/perl.git/blob/HEAD:/pod/perlrepository.pod>

If you already know how to use C<git>, you can access the repository here:

L<http://perl5.git.perl.org/perl.git/>

There is also a mirror of the repository on Github at
L<http://github.com/github/perl/> but this lags behind.

=head2 What is the APC (Archive of Perl Changes)?

Perl was formerly kept in a Perforce repository. When a change was made on the
Perforce server, a patch was generated and placed in the Archive of Perl
Changes. This is located at
L<http://ftp.linux.activestate.com/pub/staff/gsar/APC/>

The directory I<diffs/> contains patches against the latest release.

All of this has probably became irrelevant after the switch to C<git>.

=head2 What is perl-current?

C<perl-current> used to be the very latest Perforce snapshot of Perl. Now
the recommended way is to use git.

=head2 What is bleadperl? maintperl?

"bleadperl" is the term that is now used for the git C<blead> branch.

maintperl are the various maintenance branches:

  remotes/origin/maint-5.004
  remotes/origin/maint-5.005
  remotes/origin/maint-5.10
  remotes/origin/maint-5.6
  remotes/origin/maint-5.8

One for each released version of Perl.

=head1 Who's Who

=head2 What's a pumpking?

You didn't read I<Porting/pumpkin.pod>, did you? :) A pumpking is the
person who holds the patch pumpkin, the responsibility for coordinating
patches on a specific area.

=head2 What's B<the> pumpking?

B<The> pumpking is the person who holds the patch pumpkin for Perl
itself, what other projects call the "release engineer". For perl 5.8,
the pumpking was Jarkko Hietaniemi. For perl 5.10, that was Hugo van
der Sanden. Currently there is a new system whereby many people will
pumpking a new release for shorter terms. As of this writing, that
person is Jesse Vincent.

=head1 Lore

=head2 Acme

There are not enough C<Acme::> modules in core.

=head1 SOURCE

Participate through Github:

    http://github.com/briandfoy/perlfaq
    
You can also send comments to perlfaq-workers@perl.org .

=head1 AUTHORS

The FAQ was last updated Mon Nov 01 2009.

Its primary author was Simon Cozens. It's currently maintained by Rafael
Garcia-Suarez and James Laver.

=cut
