=encoding utf8

=head1 TITLE

Synopsis 5: Rules

=head1 AUTHOR

Damian Conway <damian@conway.org> and
Allison Randal <al@shadowed.net>

=head1 VERSION

  Maintainer: Larry Wall <larry@wall.org>
  Date: 24 Jun 2002
  Last Modified: 2 Dec 2004
  Number: 5
  Version: 6

This document summarizes Apocalypse 5, which is about the new regex
syntax.  We now try to call them "rules" because they haven't been
regular expressions for a long time.  (The term "regex" is still
acceptable.)

=head1 New match state variable

The underlying match state object is now available as the C<$/>
variable, which is implicitly lexically scoped.  All access to the
current (or most recent) match are through this variable, even when
it doesn't look like it.  C<$1>, C<$2>, etc. are just elements of
C<$/>, as is the entire matched string, which is available as C<$0>.

=head1 Unchanged features

=over

=item *

Capturing: (...) 

=item *

Repetition quantifiers: *, +, and ? 

=item *

Alternatives:  |

=item *

Backslash escape:  \ 

=item *

Minimal matching suffix:   ??,  *?,  +?

=back

=head1 Modifiers

=over

=item *

The extended syntax (C</x>) is no longer required...it's the default.

=item *

There are no C</s> or C</m> modifiers (changes to the meta-characters
replace them - see below).

=item *

There is no C</e> evaluation modifier on substitutions; instead use:

    s/pattern/{ code() }/

=item *

Modifiers are now placed as adverbs at the I<start> of a match/substitution:

    @matches = m:g:i/\s* (\w*) \s* ,?/;

Every modifier must start with its own colon.  The delimiter must be
separated from the final modifier by a colon or whitespace if it would
be taken as an argument to the preceding modifier.

=item *

The single-character modifiers also have longer versions:

        :i        :ignorecase
        :g        :global

=item *

The C<:c> (or C<:continue>) modifier causes the pattern to continue
scanning from the string's current C<.pos>:

    m:c/ pattern /        # start at end of
                          # previous match on $_

Note that this does not automatically anchor the pattern to the starting
location.  (Use C<:p> for that.)  The pattern you supply to C<split>
has an implicit C<:c> modifier.

=item *

The C<:p> (or C<:pos>) modifier causes the pattern to try to match only at
the string's current C<.pos>:

    m:p/ pattern /        # match at end of
                          # previous match on $_

Since this is implicitly anchored to the position, it's suitable for
building parsers and lexers.  The pattern you supply to a Perl macro's
"is parsed" trait has an implicit C<:p> modifier.

Note that

    m:c/pattern/

is roughly equivalent to

    m:p/.*? pattern/

=item *

The new C<:once> modifier replaces the Perl 5 C<?...?> syntax:

    m:once/ pattern /    # only matches first time

=item *

The new C<:w> (C<:words>) modifier causes whitespace sequences to be
replaced by C<\s*> or C<\s+> subpattern as defined by the C<< <ws> >> rule.

    m:w/ next cmd =   <condition>/

Same as:

    m/ <ws> next <ws> cmd <ws> = <ws> <condition>/

which is effectively the same as:

    m/ \s* next \s+ cmd \s* = \s* <condition>/

But in the case of
        
    m:w { (a|\*) (b|\+) }

or equivalently,

    m { (a|\*) <ws> (b|\+) }

C<< <ws> >> can't decide what to do until it sees the data.  It still does
the right thing.  If not, define your own C<< <ws> >> and C<:w> will use that.

=item *

New modifiers specify Unicode level:

    m:bytes / .**{2} /       # match two bytes
    m:codes / .**{2} /       # match two codepoints
    m:graphs/ .**{2} /       # match two graphemes
    m:langs / .**{2} /       # match two language dependent chars

There are corresponding pragmas to default to these levels.

=item *

The new C<:perl5> modifier allows Perl 5 regex syntax to be used instead:

    m:perl5/(?mi)^[a-z]{1,2}(?=\s)/

(It does not go so far as to allow you to put your modifiers at
the end.)

=item *

Any integer modifier specifies a count. What kind of count is
determined by the character that follows.

=item *

If followed by an C<x>, it means repetition.  Use C<:x(4)> for the
general form.  So

    s:4x { (<ident>) = (\N+) $$}{$1 => $2};

is the same as: 

    s:x(4) { (<ident>) = (\N+) $$}{$1 => $2};

which is almost the same as: 

    $_.pos = 0;
    s:c{ (<ident>) = (\N+) $$}{$1 => $2} for 1..4;

except that the string is unchanged unless all four matches are found.
However, ranges are allowed, so you can say C<:x(1..4)> to change anywhere
from one to four matches.

=item *

If the number is followed by an C<st>, C<nd>, C<rd>, or C<th>, it means
find the I<N>th occurrence.  Use C<:nth(3)> for the general form.  So

    s:3rd/(\d+)/@data[$1]/;

is the same as

    s:nth(3)/(\d+)/@data[$1]/;

which is the same as:

    m/(\d+)/ && m:c/(\d+)/ && s:c/(\d+)/@data[$1]/;

Lists and junctions are allowed: C<:nth(1|2|3|5|8|13|21|34|55|89)>.

So are closures: C<:nth{.is_fibonacci}>

=item *

With the new C<:ov> (C<:overlap>) modifier, the current rule will
match at all possible character positions (including overlapping)
and return all matches in a list context, or a disjunction of matches
in a scalar context.  The first match at any position is returned.

    $str = "abracadabra";

    @substrings = $str ~~ m:overlap/ a (.*) a /;

    # bracadabr cadabr dabr br

=item *

With the new C<:ex> (C<:exhaustive>) modifier, the current rule will match
every possible way (including overlapping) and return all matches in a list
context, or a disjunction of matches in a scalar context.

    $str = "abracadabra";

    @substrings = $str ~~ m:exhaustive/ a (.*) a /;

    # br brac bracad bracadabr c cad cadabr d dabr br

=item *

The new C<:rw> modifier causes this rule to "claim" the current
string for modification rather than assuming copy-on-write semantics.
All the bindings in C<$/> become lvalues into the string, such
that if you modify, say, C<$1>, the original string is modified in
that location, and the positions of all the other fields modified
accordingly (whatever that means).  In the absence of this modifier
(especially if it isn't implemented yet, or is never implemented),
all pieces of C<$/> are considered copy-on-write, if not read-only.

=item *

The new C<:keepall> modifier causes this rule and all invoked subrules
to remember everything, even if the rules themselves don't ask for
their subrules to be remembered.  This is for forcing a grammar that
throws away whitespace and comments to keep them instead.

=item *

The C<:i>, C<:w>, C<:perl5>, and Unicode-level modifiers can be
placed inside the rule (and are lexically scoped):

    m/:w alignment = [:i left|right|cent[er|re]] / 

=item *

User-defined modifiers will be possible:

        m:fuzzy/pattern/;

=item *

User-defined modifiers can also take arguments:

        m:fuzzy('bare')/pattern/;

=item *

To use parens or brackets for your delimiters you have to separate:

        m:fuzzy (pattern);
        m:fuzzy:(pattern);

or you'll end up with:

        m:fuzzy(fuzzyargs); pattern ;

=back

=head1 Changed metacharacters

=over

=item *

A dot C<.> now matches I<any> character including newline. (The C</s>
modifier is gone.)

=item *

C<^> and C<$> now always match the start/end of a string, like the
old C<\A> and C<\z>. (The C</m> modifier is gone.)

=item *

A C<$> no longer matches an optional preceding C<\n> so it's necessary
to say C<\n?$> if that's what you mean.

=item *

C<\n> now matches a logical (platform independent) newline not just C<\012>.

=item *

The C<\A>, C<\Z>, and C<\z> metacharacters are gone.

=back

=head1 New metacharacters

=over

=item *

Because C</x> is default:

=over

=item *

C<#> now always introduces a comment.

=item *

Whitespace is now always metasyntactic, i.e. used only for layout
and not matched literally (but see the C<:w> modifier described above).

=back

=item *

C<^^> and C<$$> match line beginnings and endings. (The C</m>
modifier is gone.)  They are both zero-width assertions.  C<$$>
matches before any C<\n> (logical newline), and also at the end of
the string if the final character was I<not> a C<\n>.  C<^^> always
matches the beginning of the string and after any C<\n> that is not
the final character in the string.

=item *

C<.> matches an "anything", while C<\N> matches an "anything except
newline". (The C</s> modifier is gone.)  In particular, C<\N> matches
neither carriage return nor line feed.

=item *

The new C<&> metacharacter separates conjunctive terms.  The patterns on
either side must match with the same beginning and end point.  The
operator is list associative like C<|>, and backtracking makes the
right argument vary faster than the left.

=back

=head1 Bracket rationalization

=over

=item *

C<(...)> still delimits a capturing group.

=item *

C<[...]> is no longer a character class.
It now delimits a non-capturing group.

=item *

C<{...}> is no longer a repetition quantifier.
It now delimits an embedded closure.

=item *

You can call Perl code as part of a rule match by using a closure.
Embedded code does not usually affect the match--it is only used
for side-effects:

    / (\S+) { print "string not blank\n"; $text = $1; }
       \s+  { print "but does contain whitespace\n" }
    /

=item *

It can affect the match if it calls C<fail>:

    / (\d+) { $1 < 256 or fail } /

Closures are guaranteed to be called at the canonical time even if
the optimizer could prove that something after them can't match.
(Anything before is fair game, however.)

=item *

The repetition specifier is now C<**{...}> for maximal matching,
with a corresponding or C<**{...}?> for minimal matching.  Space is
allowed on either side of the asterisks.  The curlies are taken to
be a closure returning a number or a range.

    / value was (\d ** {1..6}?) with ([\w]**{$m..$n}) /

It is illegal to return a list, so this easy mistake fails:

    / [foo]**{1,3}

(At least, it fails in the absence of "C<use rx :listquantifier>",
which is likely to be unimplemented in Perl 6.0.0 anyway).

The optimizer will likely optimize away things like C<**{1...}>
so that the closure is never actually run in that case.  But it's
a closure that must be run in the general case, so you can use
it to generate a range on the fly based on the earlier matching.
(Of course, bear in mind the closure is run I<before> attempting to
match whatever it quantifies.)

=item *

C<< <...> >> are now extensible metasyntax delimiters or "assertions"
(i.e. they replace Perl 5's crufty C<(?...)> syntax).

=back

=head1 Variable (non-)interpolation

=over

=item *

In Perl 6 rules, variables don't interpolate.

=item *

Instead they're passed "raw" to the rule engine, which can then decide
how to handle them (more on that below).

=item *

The default way in which the engine handles a scalar is to match it
as a C<< <'...'> >> literal (i.e.it does not treat the interpolated string
as a subpattern).  In other words, a Perl 6:

    / $var /

is like a Perl 5:

    / \Q$var\E /

(To get rule interpolation use an assertion - see below)

=item *

An interpolated array:

    / @cmds /

is matched as if it were an alternation of its elements:

    / [ @cmds[0] | @cmds[1] | @cmds[2] | ... ] /


As with a scalar variable, each one is matched as a literal.

=item *

An interpolated hash matches the longest possible key of the hash
as a literal, or fails if no key matches.  (A C<""> key
will match anywhere, provided no longer key matches.)

=over 4

=item *

If the corresponding value of the hash element is a closure, it
is executed.

=item *

If it is a string or rule object, it is executed as a subrule.

=item *

If it has the value 1, nothing special happens beyond the match.

=item *

Any other value causes the match to fail.

=back

=back

=head1 Extensible metasyntax (C<< <...> >>)

=over

=item *

The first character after C<< < >> determines the behaviour of the assertion.

=item *

A leading alphabetic character means it's a grammatical assertion
(i.e. a subpattern or a named character class - see below):

    / <sign>? <mantissa> <exponent>? /

=item *

The special named assertions include:

    / <before pattern> /    # was /(?=pattern)/
    / <after pattern> /     # was /(?<pattern)/ 

    / <ws> /                # match whitespace by :w rules

    / <sp> /                # match a space char

The C<after> assertion implements lookbehind by reversing the syntax
tree and looking for things in the opposite order going to the left.
It is illegal to do lookbehind on a pattern that cannot be reversed.

=item *

A leading C<$> indicates an indirect rule.  The variable must contain
either a hard reference to a rule, or a string containing the rule.

=item *

A leading C<::> indicates a symbolic indirect rule:

    / <::($somename)>

The variable must contain the name of a rule.

=item *

A leading C<@> matches like a bare array except that each element
is treated as a rule (string or hard ref) rather than as a literal.

=item *

A leading C<%> matches like a bare hash except that each key
is treated as a rule (string or hard ref) rather than as a literal.

=item *

A leading C<{> indicates code that produces a rule to be interpolated
into the pattern at that point:

    / (<ident>)  <{ %cache{$1} //= get_body($1) }> /

The closure is guaranteed to be run at the canonical time.

=item *

A leading C<&> interpolates the return value of a subroutine call as
a rule.  Hence

    <&foo()>

is short for

    <{ foo() }>

=item *

In any case of rule interpolation, if the value already happens to be
a rule object, it is not recompiled.  If it is a string, the compiled
form is cached with the string so that it is not recompiled next
time you use it unless the string changes.  (Any external lexical
variable names must be rebound each time though.)  Rules may not be
interpolated with unbalanced bracketing.  An interpolated subrule
keeps its own inner C<$/>, so its parentheses never count toward the
outer rules groupings.  (In other words, parenthesis numbering is always
lexically scoped.)

=item *

A leading C<(> indicates a code assertion:

    / (\d**{1..3}) <( $1 < 256 )> /

Similar to:

    / (\d**{1..3}) { $1 < 256 or fail } /

Unlike closures, code assertions are not guaranteed to be run at the
canonical time if the optimizer can prove something later can't match.
So you can sneak in a call to a non-canonical closure that way:

    /^foo .* <( do { say "Got here!" } or 1 )> .* bar$/

The C<do> block is unlikely to run unless the string ends with "C<bar>".

=item *

A leading C<[> or C<+> indicates an enumerated character class:

    / <[a-z_]>* /
    / <+[a-z_]>* /

The C<+> is required if starting with an angled character class:

    / <+<alpha>> /

Without the plus it would be interpreted as

    / «alpha» /

which means something else (see below).

=item *

A leading C<-> indicates a complemented character class:

    / <-[a-z_]> <-<alpha>> /

=item *

A leading C<'> indicates a literal match (including whitespace):

    / <'match this exactly (whitespace matters)'> /

=item *

A leading C<"> indicates a literal match after interpolation:

    / <"match $THIS exactly (whitespace still matters)"> /

=item *

The special assertion C<< <.> >> matches any logical grapheme
(including a Unicode combining character sequences):

    / seekto = <.> /  # Maybe a combined char

Same as:

    / seekto = [:graphs .] /

=item *

A leading C<!> indicates a negated meaning (always a zero-width assertion):

    / <!before _ > /    # We aren't before an _

=back

=head1 Backslash reform

=over

=item *

The C<\p> and C<\P> properties become intrinsic grammar rules
(C<< <prop ...> >> and C<< <!prop ...> >>).

=item *

The C<\L...\E>, C<\U...\E>, and C<\Q...\E> sequences are gone.  In the
rare cases that need them you can use C<< <{ lc $rule }> >> etc.

=item *

The C<\G> sequence is gone.  Use C<:p> instead.  (Note, however, that
it makes no sense to use C<:p> within a pattern, since every internal
pattern is implicitly anchored to the current position.  You'll have
to explicitly compare C<< <( .pos == $oldpos )> >> in that case.)

=item *

Backreferences (e.g. C<\1>) are gone; C<$1> can be used instead,
because variables are no longer interpolated.

=item *

New backslash sequences, C<\h> and C<\v>, match horizontal and vertical
whitespace respectively, including Unicode.

=item *

C<\s> now matches any Unicode whitespace character.

=item *

The new backslash sequence C<\N> matches anything except a logical
newline; it is the negation of C<\n>.

=item *

A series of other new capital backslash sequences are also the negation
of their lower-case counterparts:

=over

=item *

C<\H> matches anything but horizontal whitespace.

=item *

C<\V> matches anything but vertical whitespace.

=item *

C<\T> matches anything but a tab.

=item *

C<\R> matches anything but a return.

=item *

C<\F> matches anything but a formfeed.

=item *

C<\E> matches anything but an escape.

=item *

C<\X...> matches anything but the specified hex character.

=back

=back

=head1 Regexes are rules

=over

=item *

The Perl 5  C<qr/pattern/> regex constructor is gone.

=item *

The Perl 6 equivalents are:

    rule { pattern }    # always takes {...} as delimiters
    rx / pattern /      # can take (almost any) chars as delimiters

You may not use whitespace or alphanumerics for delimiters.  Space is
optional unless needed to distinguish from modifier arguments or
function parens.  So you may use parens as your C<rx> delimiters,
but only if you interpose a colon or whitespace:

    rx:( pattern )      # okay
    rx ( pattern )      # okay
    rx( 1,2,3 )         # tries to call rx function

=item *

If either form needs modifiers, they go before the opening delimiter:

    $rule = rule :g:w:i { my name is (.*) };
    $rule = rx:g:w:i / my name is (.*) /;

Space or colon is necessary after the final modifer if you use any
bracketing character for the delimiter.  (Otherwise it would be taken as
an argument to the modifier.)

=item *

You may not use colons for the delimiter.  Space is allowed between
modifiers:

    $rule = rx :g :w :i / my name is (.*) /;

=item *

The name of the constructor was changed from C<qr> because it's no
longer an interpolating quote-like operator.  C<rx> stands for "rule
expression", or occasionally "regex".  C<:-)>

=item *

As the syntax indicates, it is now more closely analogous to a C<sub {...}>
constructor.  In fact, that analogy will run I<very> deep in Perl 6.

=item *

Just as a raw C<{...}> is now always a closure (which may still
execute immediately in certain contexts and be passed as a reference
in others), so too a raw C</.../> is now always a rule (which may still
match immediately in certain contexts and be passed as a reference
in others).

=item *

Specifically, a C</.../> matches immediately in a value context (void,
Boolean, string, or numeric), or when it is an explicit argument of
a C<~~>.  Otherwise it's a rule constructor.  So this:

    $var = /pattern/;

no longer does the match and sets C<$var> to the result.
Instead it assigns a rule reference to C<$var>.

=item *

The two cases can always be distinguished using C<m{...}> or C<rx{...}>:

    $var = m{pattern};    # Match rule immediately, assign result
    $var = rx{pattern};   # Assign rule expression itself

=item *

Note that this means that former magically lazy usages like:

    @list = split /pattern/, $str;

are now just consequences of the normal semantics.

=item *

It's now also possible to set up a user-defined subroutine that acts
like C<grep>:

    sub my_grep($selector, *@list) {
        given $selector {
            when Rule  { ... }
            when Code  { ... }
            when Hash  { ... }
            # etc.
        }
    }

Using C<{...}> or C</.../> in the scalar context of the first argument
causes it to produce a C<Code> or C<Rule> reference, which the switch
statement then selects upon.

=back

=head1 Backtracking control

=over

=item *

Backtracking over a single colon causes the rule engine not to retry
the preceding atom:

    m:w/ \( <expr> [ , <expr> ]* : \) /

(i.e. there's no point trying fewer C<< <expr> >> matches, if there's
no closing parenthesis on the horizon)

=item *

Backtracking over a double colon causes the surrounding group of
alternations to immediately fail:

    m:w/ [ if :: <expr> <block>
         | for :: <list> <block>
         | loop :: <loop_controls>? <block>
         ]
    /

(i.e. there's no point trying to match a different keyword if one
was already found but failed).  It is illegal to use C<::> outside
of an alternation.

=item *

Backtracking over a triple colon causes the current rule to fail
outright (no matter where in the rule it occurs):

    rule ident {
          ( [<alpha>|_] \w* ) ::: { fail if %reserved{$1} }
        | " [<alpha>|_] \w* "
    }

    m:w/ get <ident>? /

(i.e. using an unquoted reserved word as an identifier is not permitted)

=item *

Backtracking over a C<< <commit> >> assertion causes the entire match
to fail outright, no matter how many subrules down it happens:

    rule subname {
        ([<alpha>|_] \w*) <commit> { fail if %reserved{$1} }
    }
    m:w/ sub <subname>? <block> /

(i.e. using a reserved word as a subroutine name is instantly fatal
to the "surrounding" match as well)

=item *

A C<< <cut> >> assertion always matches successfully, and has the
side effect of deleting the parts of the string already matched.

=item *

Attempting to backtrack past a C<< <cut> >> causes the complete match
to fail (like backtracking past a C<< <commit> >>. This is because there's
now no preceding text to backtrack into.

=item *

This is useful for throwing away successfully processed input when
matching from an input stream or an iterator of arbitrary length.

=back

=head1 Named Regexes

=over

=item *

The analogy between C<sub> and C<rule> extends much further.

=item *

Just as you can have anonymous subs and named subs...

=item *

...so too you can have anonymous rules and I<named> rules:

    rule ident { [<alpha>|_] \w* }

    # and later...

    @ids = grep /<ident>/, @strings;

=item *

As the above example indicates, it's possible to refer to named rules,
such as:

    rule serial_number { <[A-Z]> \d**{8} })
    rule type { alpha | beta | production | deprecated | legacy }

in other rules as named assertions:

    rule identification { [soft|hard]ware <type> <serial_number> }

=back

=head1 Nothing is illegal

=over

=item *

The null pattern is now illegal.

=item *

To match whatever the prior successful rule matched, use:

    /<prior>/

=item *

To match the zero-width string, use:

    /<null>/

For example:

    split /<null>/, $string

splits between characters.

=item *

To match a null alternative, use:

    /a|b|c|<null>/

This makes it easier to catch errors like this:

    m:w/ [
         | if :: <expr> <block>
         | for :: <list> <block>
         | loop :: <loop_controls>? <block>
         ]
    /

=item *

However, it's okay for a non-null syntactic construct to have a degenerate
case matching the null string:

    $something = "";
    /a|b|c|$something/;

=back

=head1 Rule-scoped variables

=over

=item *

Within a rule, the current state of the match is called C<$/>.

=item *

The C<$/> object contains all the current bindings of any submatches,
so it includes C<$0>, C<$1>, C<$2>, etc.

=item *

The C<$/> object also contains a hash of named variables lexically
scoped to the current rule.  These may be named by hash subscripting:
C<$/{'foo'}> or C<< $/<foo> >>.  For readability the latter form the
C<$/> may be replaced with an appropriate sigil: C<< $<foo> >>.

=back

=head1 Hypothetical variables

=over

=item *

In embedded closures it's possible to bind a variable to a value that
only "sticks" if the surrounding pattern successfully matches.

=item *

As with C<temp> variables, a hypothetical variable is set
with the keyword C<let> followed by binding or assignment of the
desired value:

    my $num;
    / (\d+) {let $num := $1} (<alpha>+)/

(The value bound or assigned need not be a part of the string being searched.)

=item *

Now C<$num> will only be bound to C<$1> if the digits are actually
found.  (Within a rule it's generally better to use binding rather
than assignment to avoid excessive copying of data values you might
later just throw away.)

=item *

You may also set rule-scoped variables hypothetically:

    / (\d+) {let $<num> := $1} (<alpha>+)/

In this case the variable lives in C<$/> rather than the surrounding
lexical pad.

=item *

If the match ever backtracks past the closure (i.e. if there are no
alphabetics following), the binding is "undone", and the variable
reverts to its previous value (or lack thereof).

=item *

This is even more interesting in alternations:

    / [ (\d+)      { let $<num>   := $1 }
      | (<alpha>+) { let $<alpha> := $2 }
      | (.)        { let $<other> := $3 }
      ]
    /

=item *

There is also a shorthand for binding to variables hypothetically:

    / [ $<num>  := (\d+)
      | $<alpha>:= (<alpha>+)
      | $<other>:= (.)
      ]
    /

Either way you write it, if an alternative is bypassed, a variable that
has never been bound to a value evaluates to undefined.

=item *

There is no shorthand for assignment.

=item *

The binding shorthand is right associative just like the ordinary operator.

    our $cheater;
    sub foo { say $cheater }
    / $cheater := $<capture> := (\d+) { foo() } /

=item *

When implicitly bound by captures, the numeric variables (C<$1>,
C<$2>, etc.) are automatically bound "hypothetically", as if you'd
said

    { let $1 := "string" }

If you explicitly say

    { $1 := "string" }

the variable is not bound hypothetically, so C<$1> persists as long as
the current match object persists, even if this closure is backtracked
over.  However, since C<$/> is itself a hypothetical variable,
the lifetime of any numbered variable is somewhat hypothetical in
any case, scoped to some outer calling context, either a calling
pattern, or the current non-pattern scope that invoked this pattern.
This implies that, outside the entire match, a failed, false C<$/>
can return a defined, non-hypothetically bound C<$1>, up till the time
the C<$/> object is itself destroyed.

=item *

Numeric variables can be bound, and even re-ordered:

    my ($key, $val) = m:w{ $1:=(\w+) =\> $2:=(.*?)
                         | $2:=(.*?) \<= $1:=(\w+)
                         };

If you bind any numeric variables, you have to set them all, because
automatic binding of numeric variables is disabled elsewhere in
the rule.  So the example above doesn't automatically set C<$3> or C<$4>.

=item *

You may also bind the numeric variables explicitly in closures, in which
case the normal numbering is not disabled:

    my ($key, $val) = m:w{ (\w+) =\> (.*?)
                         | (.*?) \<= (\w+) { ($2,$1) := ($3,$4) }
                         };

But you have to be careful to do things in the right order to avoid
clobbering a value you're going to want later.

=item *

Repeated captures can be bound to arrays:

    / @<values> := [ (.*?) , ]* /

=item *

Pairs of repeated captures can be bound to hashes:

    / %<options> := [ (<ident>) = (\N+) ]* /

=item *

Or just capture the keys (and leave the values undef):

    / %<options> := [ (<ident>) = \N+ ]* /

=item *

As a general rule, if you capture anything repeating with a scalar
destination, you end up with a list reference as the scalar value
(even if in the actual case only one thing matches).  This always
puts a list into the scalar:

    / $<foo> := [ (.*?) , ]* /

And this puts a list of lists:

    / $<bar> := [ (<ident>) = (\N+) ]* /

=item *

By default, any simple alphabetic subrule (e.g. C<< <rule> >>) captures
its results.  To suppress capture, use French quotes instead of angles (no
pun intended):

    / <key> «ws» =\> «ws» <value> { %hash{$«key»} = $«value» } /

Non-alphabetic assertions and assertions with arguments are not
captured by default.  They must be explicitly bound or placed in
parentheses to be captured.

=item *

All rules remember everything anyway if C<:keepall> is in effect
anywhere in the outer dynamic scope.  To avoid any confusion with
"intentional" names, strange fields forced to remember this way include
the angles as part of the variable name.  Suppose the earlier example
parsed whitespace:

    / <key> «ws» <'=>'> «ws» <value> { %hash{$<key>} = $<value> } /

The two instances of C<< «ws» >> above would store an array of two
values accessible as C<< @<«ws»> >>.  It would also store the literal
match into C<< $«<'=>'>» >>.  Just to make sure nothing is
forgotten, under C<:keepall> any text not otherwise remembered is
attached as an extra property on the subsequent node. (The name of
that property is "C<pretext>".)

=back

=head1 Return values from matches

=over

=item *

A match always returns a "match object", which is also available as
(lexical) C<$/> (except within a closure lexically embedded in a rule,
where C<$/> always refers to the current match, not any submatch done
within the closure).

=item *

The match object evaluates differently in different contexts:

=over 

=item *

In boolean context it evaluates as true or false (i.e. did the match
succeed?):

    if /pattern/ {...}
    # or:
    /pattern/; if $/ {...}

=item * 

In numeric context it evaluates to the number of matches:

    $match_count += m:g/pattern/;

=item * 

In string context it evaluates to C<$0>, the entire matched string:

    print %hash{"{$text ~~ /<ident>/}"};
    # or equivalently: 
    $text ~~ /<ident>/  &&  print %hash{~$/};

But generally you should say C<$0> if you mean C<$0>.

=item *

When used as an array, C<$/> pretends to be an array containing
C<$1>, C<$2>, etc.  Hence

    ($key, $val) = m:w/ (\S+) => (\S+)/;

can also be written:

    $result = m:w/ (\S+) => (\S+)/;
    ($key, $val) = @$result;

For this reason C<$0> is not returned as part of the list (unless there are
no other captures).

To get a single capture into a string, use a subscript:

    $mystring = "{ m:w/ (\S+) => (\S+)/[0] }";

To get all the captures into a string, use a "zen" slice:

    $mystring = "{ m:w/ (\S+) => (\S+)/[] }";

Note that, as a scalar variable, C<$/> doesn't automatically flatten
in list context.  Use C<@$/> or C<$/[]> to flatten as an array.

=item *

When used as a hash, C<$/> pretends to be a hash of all the named
captures.  The keys do not include any sigils, so if you capture to
variable C<< @<foo> >> its real name is C<$/{'foo'}> or C<< $/<foo> >>.
However, you may still refer to it as C<< @<foo> >> anywhere C<$/>
is visible.  (But it is erroneous to use the same name for two different
capture datatypes.)

Note that, as a scalar variable, C<$/> doesn't automatically flatten
in list context.  Use C<%$/> or C<$/{}> to flatten as a hash, or bind
it to a variable of the appropriate type.

=item *

The numbered captures may be treated as named, so C<$<1 2 3>>
is equivalent to C<$/[0,1,2]>.  This allows you to write slices of
intermixed named and numbered captures.  C<$0> and C<$<0>> are the
same thing, but there is no way to get at C<$0> via the array subscript
notation.  (Saying C<$/[-1]> returns the final capture, not
C<$0>.)

=item *

Note that C<$<0>> is not merely a recursive reference to C<$/>,
because they are of different types.  C<$/> is a polymorphic match
object, while C<$0> is a string (presuming you're matching a string).
The two objects take different sets of methods.

=item *

In ordinary code, variables C<$1>, C<$2>, etc. are just aliases into
C<$/[0]>, C<$/[1]>, etc.  Hence they will all be undefined if the
last match failed (unless they were explicitly bound in a closure without
using the C<let> keyword).

=back

=item *

I<Within> a rule, C<$/> acts like a hypothetical variable.

=item *

It controls what a rule match returns (like C<$$> does in yacc)

=item *

Use C<$0:=> to override the default return behaviour described above:

    rule string1 { (<["'`]>) ([ \\. | <-[\\]> ]*?) $1 }

    $match = m/<string1>/;  # default: $match includes 
                            # opening and closing quotes


    rule string2 { (<["'`]>) $0:=([ \\. | <-[\\]> ]*?) $1 }

    $match = m/<string2>/;  # $match now excludes quotes
                            # because $0 explicitly bound 
                            # to second capture only

This influences the string returned by C<$0>, as well as where the
rule thinks it started and stopped matching.  (That is, C<.pos> is set
to the right end of the forced C<$0>.)  However, all the numbered and
named fields are available through C<$/> just as if the entire match
had been returned for C<$0>.  So the quote character still shows up
in C<$1>.

=item *

When binding C<$0> in a closure, it is syntactically valid to
bind anything.  However, it is potentially erroneous to bind C<$0>
to anything that is not part of the string being matched, since it
might confuse C<.pos> completely.  On the other hand, maybe that's
a convenient way to redirect the match to continue in a different
string entirely.

The C<$/> variable may not be rebound within a rule.

=back

=head1 Matching against non-strings

=over

=item *

Anything that can be tied to a string can be matched against a
rule. This feature is particularly useful with input streams:

    my $stream is from($fh);       # tie scalar to filehandle

    # and later...

    $stream ~~ m/pattern/;         # match from stream

An array can be matched against a rule.  The special C<< <,> >>
rule matches the boundary between elements.  If the array elements
are strings, they are concatenated virtually into a single logical
string.  If the array elements are tokens or other such objects, the
objects must provide appropriate methods for the kinds of rules to
match against.  It is an assertion error to match a string matching
assertion against an object that doesn't provide a string view.
However, pure token objects can be parsed as long as the match rule
restricts itself to assertions like:

    <.isa(Dog)>
    <.does(Bark)>
    <.can('scratch')>

It is permissible to mix tokens and strings in an array as long as they're
in different elements.  You may not embed objects in strings, however.

To match against each element of an array, use a hyper operator:

    @array».match($rule)

=back

=head1 Grammars

=over

=item *

Your private C<ident> rule shouldn't clobber someone else's
C<ident> rule.  So some mechanism is needed to confine rules to a namespace.

=item *

If subs are the model for rules, then modules/classes are the obvious
model for aggregating them.  Such collections of rules are generally
known as "grammars".

=item *

Just as a class can collect named actions together:

    class Identity {
        method name { "Name = $.name" }
        method age  { "Age  = $.age"  }
        method addr { "Addr = $.addr" }

        method desc {
            print .name(), "\n",
                  .age(),  "\n",
                  .addr(), "\n";
        }

        # etc.
    }

so too a grammar can collect a set of named rules together:

    grammar Identity {
        rule name :w { Name = (\N+) }
        rule age  :w { Age  = (\d+) }
        rule addr :w { Addr = (\N+) }
        rule desc {
            <name> \n
            <age>  \n
            <addr> \n
        }

        # etc.
    }

=item *

Like classes, grammars can inherit:

    grammar Letter {
        rule text     { <greet> <body> <close> }

        rule greet :w { [Hi|Hey|Yo] $to:=(\S+?) , $$}

        rule body     { <line>+ }

        rule close :w { Later dude, $from:=(.+) }

        # etc.
    }

    grammar FormalLetter is Letter {

        rule greet :w { Dear $to:=(\S+?) , $$}

        rule close :w { Yours sincerely, $from:=(.+) }

    }

=item *

Just like the methods of a class, the rule definitions of a grammar are
inherited (and polymorphic!). So there's no need to respecify C<body>,
C<line>, etc.

=item *

Perl 6 will come with at least one grammar predefined:

    grammar Perl {    # Perl's own grammar

        rule prog { <statement>* }

        rule statement { <decl>
                  | <loop>
                  | <label> [<cond>|<sideff>|;]
        }

        rule decl { <sub> | <class> | <use> }

        # etc. etc. etc.
    }

=item *

Hence:

    given $source_code {
        $parsetree = m/<Perl.prog>/;
    }

=back

=head1 Syntactic categories

For writing your own backslash and assertion rules or macros, you may
use the following syntactic categories:

    rule rxbackslash:<w> { ... }    # define your own \w and \W
    rule rxassertion:<*> { ... }    # define your own <*stuff> and «*stuff»
    macro rxmetachar:<,> { ... }    # define a new metacharacter
    macro rxmodinternal:<x> { ... } # define your own /:x() stuff/
    macro rxmodexternal:<x> { ... } # define your own m:x()/stuff/

As with any such syntactic shenanigans, the declaration must be visible in
the lexical scope to have any effect.  It's possible the internal/external
distinction is just a trait, and that some of those things are subs
or methods rather than rules or macros.  (The numeric rxmods are recognized
by fallback macros defined with an empty operator name.)

=head1 Pragmas

The C<rx> pragma may be used to control various aspects of regex
compilation and usage not otherwise provided for.

=head1 Transliteration

=over

=item *

The C<tr///> quote-like operator now also has a method form called
C<trans()>.  Its argument is a list of pairs.  You can use anything that
produces a pair list:

    $str.trans( %mapping.pairs.sort );

Use the .= form to do a translation in place:

    $str.=trans( %mapping.pairs.sort );

=item *

The two sides of the any pair can be strings interpreted as C<tr///> would:

    $str.=trans( 'A-C' => 'a-c', 'XYZ' => 'xyz' );

As a degenerate case, each side can be individual characters:

    $str.=trans( 'A'=>'a', 'B'=>'b', 'C'=>'c' );

=item *

The two sides of each pair may also be array references:

    $str.=trans( ['A'..'C'] => ['a'..'c'], <X Y Z> => <x y z> );

=item *

The array version can map one-or-more characters to one-or-more
characters:

    $str.=trans( [' ',      '<',    '>',    '&'    ] =>
                 ['&nbsp;', '&lt;', '&gt;', '&amp;' ]);


In the case that more than one sequence of input characters matches,
the longest one wins.  In the case of two identical sequences the
first in order wins.

There are also method forms of C<m//> and C<s//>:

    $str.match(//);
    $str.subst(//, "replacement")
    $str.subst(//, {"replacement"})
    $str.=subst(//, "replacement")
    $str.=subst(//, {"replacement"})

=back
