=head1 This Week on perl5-porters (29 July / 4 August 2002)

Now that perl 5.8.0 is out and flies by itself, the 5.9 development track
begins. Learn about what may go (or not) in perl 5.9. Plus the usual
amount of bugs.

=head2 Some directions for perl 5.9

Hugo van der Sanden posted his views on the general directions of perl 5.9
development. Shortly, he listed (with varying degrees of importance or
probability) : improving perl's speed ; cleaning the sources ; converging
with Perl 6 (with a possible new perl6ish pragma, to use some of the
incompatible Perl 6 constructs or deprecations) ; providing multiple Perl
distributions containing a various amount of modules.

There was also some handwaving (which I initiated) about having some kind
of Perl 5 to Perl 6 or Parrot translator. This would probably involve
improving the C<B::> backend framework if this is the way to go.

    http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=200207301220.g6UCKtr07589%40crypt.compulink.co.uk

(I now give the message links to google, so you can navigate the whole
thread. I found this more convenient.)

Pseudo-hashes and the old 5005 threads will be removed. Michael G Schwern
provided a first patch to cut off pseudo-hashes, that doesn't handle
the necessary changes to the core modules, esp. fields.pm and
base.pm.

Hugo also wondered if non-PerlIO perls should be deprecated. This decision
should be based on some real-world feedback -- are there platforms that
have problems with PerlIO ?

    http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=200207301220.g6UCKvQ07607%40crypt.compulink.co.uk

=head2 Change in the logic of the CPAN indexer

As 5.8.0 is out, some problems arise when the CPAN shell is used to
install modules that have a dual life (on CPAN and in the core.) Andreas
Koenig has updated the CPAN indexer so that I<it indexes perl distribution
only for packages that have no separate lives on CPAN.> All packages that
have dual lives have been also re-indexed ; this should solve current
problems.

=head2 PID and threads on Linux

One of the specificities of the implementation of threads on Linux is
that threads get different PIDs. So Elizabeth Mattijsen asked for a
way to get this PID from inside Perl, because C<$$> is always the process
number of thread 0.

It turned out that C<POSIX::getpid()> simply returns C<$$>, and that C<$$>
is is a read-only scalar, set at startup- and at fork-time. But the system
call C<getpid()> returns different values for different threads (on Linux).

It was agreed that, to be portable (and POSIX-compliant), C<$$> should
return the same value across all threads -- the current behavior is thus
correct (but undocumented.) However Perl's built-in function C<getppid()>
always performs the underlying C call, and return different values from
different threads. This should be fixed.

    http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=4.2.0.58.20020801191058.02b8a440%40mickey.dijkmat.nl

=head2 A couple of core dumps

Somebody reported that writing C<%:: = ""> with warnings enabled leads to
immediate segfault (bug #15479). Elizabeth, trying to write
something like C<our ${""} : foo = 1>, reported another core dump case
(this should be a syntax error) (bug #15898). This lead to a small thread
about the right place for regression tests for nonsense code like this.
The conclusion is that they should go in the test file that seems the more
appropriate for it (in those cases, respectively tests for symbol table
hashes and for attributes.)

=head2 Schwern's Thoughts from TPC

Michael G Schwern sent a list of thoughts and ideas that were discussed at
TPC :

What new modules should be included in 5.10, and based on which criteria ?
The simple criterion he proposes is : I<Will this module help users
install more modules?> He suggests notably to borgify CPANPLUS, a
simplified LWP, Archive::Tar, Archive::Zip, Module::Build
(this implies YAML), and Inline.

    http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20020801160521.GB1064%40ool-18b93024.dyn.optonline.net

About Inline, and related to the QA effort, Schwern suggests to test
the core API and internals with Inline::C. Continuing on Inline, he
emits also the idea that XS core modules may be ported to an Inline::C
implementation. Brian Ingerson (author of Inline) acknowledges that
Inline::C can be used at perl build-time, but he thinks that the only
thing that needs to be installed on a user machine is I<enough of
Inline.pm to invoke Dynaloader. About 30 lines of code.> He adds that this
is the only part of Inline that he would like to see distributed with 5.9.

    http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20020801161356.GD1064%40ool-18b93024.dyn.optonline.net

Finally,  Schwern suggests to eliminate the changelogs and the old
perldelta manpages from the perl distribution (those are pretty huge and
can be distributed separately), and to provide an alternate bzip2 tarball
of perl.

=head2 In brief

Philip Hazel reported a couple of bugs about the C<\C> regexp anchor.
(Bugs #15763 and #15774).

Ilya Zakharevich reported that list assignment with common variables
on both sides (e.g. C<($a,$b) = ($b,$a)>) don't work with aliased
variables (e.g. C<($a,$b) = ($c,$d)> where $c is an alias to $b and $d an
alias to $a.) Bug #15667.

Craig Berry noticed that I<extension building against an installed Perl
on VMS is broken in 5.8.0>. He provided a patch, and said also that
I<in lieu of the patch, folks can either build extensions against an 
uninstalled Perl or simply copy the missing files manually.>

Elizabeth Mattijsen reported a memory leak in threads::shared.
Hopefully this problem will only need a patch to threads::shared, that
can be released to CPAN. (Bug #15893.)

Bleadperl now reports its version as 5.9.0, and Hugo began to apply
patches. We're waiting for the first snapshot...

=head2 About this summary

This summary brought to you by Rafael Garcia-Suarez, from Lyon, France. --
Nota. I'll be on vacation (and off-line) for two weeks in August :
approximately from 12th to 25th. So there will be no summary for those
weeks. If you find those summaries helpful, and if you want to become a
superhero, take over the report for two little weeks! Please drop me a
line at rgarciasuarez at free.fr. (If you find those summaries helpful but
don't want to take them over, go send money to YAS. Perhaps they'll hire
an interim writer.)

This report is also available via a mailing list, which
subscription address is F<perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org>.
