=head1 This Week on perl5-porters (30th December 2002 / 5th January 2003)

What are the perl5-porters' new year resolutions ? You won't learn it by
reading this week's highly technical summary. But that's not the point, is
it ?

=head2 Copy constructor contract

Rick Delaney reports (bug #19582) that a copy constructor that doesn't
return a blessed reference may produce segfaults when the resulting
reference is used. As a solution, he proposes to forbid copy constructors to
return non-objects. (Currently, copy constructors can't return
non-references, but can return unblessed references.)

  The bug : http://archive.develooper.com/perl5-porters@perl.org/msg90340.html
  The fix : http://archive.develooper.com/perl5-porters@perl.org/msg90321.html

=head2 Simple segfault

Some good bug hunting was done for bug #19566, a simple case of segfault,
caused by this simple snippet of code (there are many variants) :

    for (\2) { $_ = <FH> }

Oddly enough, this bug seems to exist since a long time (5.003_01), but
haven't been fixed.

    http://archive.develooper.com/perl5-porters@perl.org/msg90334.html

=head2 Parens in pack()

Wolfgang Laun asked a question about the semantics of parentheses in
pack() templates. Nicholas Clark confessed that C<'('> in pack makes his
head hurt, and frankly, I'm with him on this point. See for yourself :

    http://archive.develooper.com/perl5-porters@perl.org/msg90455.html

=head2 Link black magic

Chip Turner initiated a thread on shared libperl builds, which I don't
(frankly) want to summarize here. If you're interested in the issues in
packaging, distributing and upgrading binaries of perl, follow the link :

    http://archive.develooper.com/perl5-porters@perl.org/msg90384.html

=head2 In brief

Gisle Aas provided updates for his modules MIME::Base64 and Digest::MD5.

Hugo released a snapshot of bleadperl (the 5.9.0-to be), shortly followed
by Jarkko releasing a snapshot of maintperl (the 5.8.1-to be). Jarkko
released another snapshot at the end of the week before his planned
connectivity problems.

Nicholas Clark proposed a patch to implement copy on write for the $& and
$<DIGIT> variables. As with other copy on write implementations, it's
available only if perl is configured with the -DPERL_COPY_ON_WRITE flag.
However, this patch doesn't seem to be a significant speedup (or
slowdown).

On the performance chapter, Jarkko also sent a patch to speed up Unicode
operations.

Jarkko thrown at us an interesting link : I<Someone might want to try
Splint at Perl 5 (or Parrot, for that matter) sources.>
(see F<http://www.splint.org/>).

=head2 About this summary

This summary brought to you by Rafael Garcia-Suarez and his hurting brain.
(OK, I was obviously tired this week, I blame this bad cold I got.)
Summaries are available on F<http://use.perl.org/> and/or via a mailing
list, which subscription address is F<perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org>.
Comments and corrections are welcome.
