=head1 This Week on perl5-porters (22-28 December 2003)

Due to holidays, this was a low-traffic week. That's one more reason to
get it delivered in time.

=head2 Math::BigInt

Tels pre-released Math::BigInt 1.68, with new stuff, refactorization,
memory savings, and new method aliases to make the interface more
consistent. He also posted some benchmarks.

    http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=200312230106.27661%40bloodgate.com
    http://www.bloodgate.com/perl/bigint/bench_timeline.html

=head2 Optimizations

Enache Adrian re-optimized the implementation of the string concatenation
with lexical variables; the previous optimization has been disabled
because it was buggy.

=head2 Windows breakages

According to bug report #24731, the implementation of fork() has problems
under Windows 2003 64-Bit on Itanium 2. Unfortunately, we lack porters with
access to this kind of machine.

    http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=rt-3.0.7_01-24731-68810.11.7760523742712%40perl.org

Speaking about Windows, we seem to have lost threaded builds of perl 5.8.x
on Windows, for an unknown reasons. Investigations to follow...
(Obviously, perl 5.8.3 can't be shipped without this being fixed.)

    http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20031227224542.GZ94211%40plum.flirble.org

=head2 Other bugs

Ton Hospel reports that C<undef> used with the range operator in list
context is treated as numerical 0, even for a magical string range. Rafael
fixed this.

    http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=rt-3.0.7_01-24735-68834.12.6928254949564%40perl.org

Jarkko Hietaniemi reports that this small code snippet :

    *foo{CODE} ? 1 : 0

is a syntax error in perl. It shouldn't be. Rafael fixed this.

    http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=rt-3.0.7_01-24762-68931.15.246354815684%40perl.org

Marcus Holland-Moritz thinks he hits a bug in a recent development
snapshot of gcc 3.4, because a sprintf() test failing in perl's test
suite. The bug in fact turns out to be an old bug in gcc's optimizer, and
is trigerred with the C<-O3> level since gcc 3.4.

    http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=02b801c3ca9a$ff6661e0$5700a8c0%40R2D2

=head2 About this summary

This summary was written by Rafael Garcia-Suarez. Weekly summaries are
published on F<http://use.perl.org/> and posted on a mailing list, which
subscription address is F<perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org>. Corrections
and comments are welcome.
