=head1 This Week on perl5-porters (24-30 November 2003)

A quiet week for the Perl 5 porters, but some threads are worth noting.
Notably, I have now a reason to mention Leon Brocard in the summary
without appealing to any running joke.

=head2 New Pumpking crowned

Leon Brocard is now the pumpking for the 5.005xx maintainance branch of
perl. The plan for 5.00504 is roughly the same than the plan for 5.6.2 :
build fixes for new platforms.

    http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20031126145110.GA28063%40perlsupport.com

=head2 sprintf and long doubles

Ilya Zakharevich's patch to speed up C<sprintf()> with floating point
values and a fixed number of digits was found to cause a different
result than perl's regular C<sprintf()> with a perl configured with long
doubles. Rafael disabled part of the optimization in this case.

    http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20031124070834.GA1658%40ratsnest.hole

=head2 DynaLoader and PAR

Edward S. Peschko proposed a patch to C<DynaLoader> to store the names of
the shared object files loaded by perl. As he says, it's I<intended for
use with PAR (for run time detection of shared objects rather than compile
time analysis)>.

Rafael points out a little problem -- the array storing file names should
be C<:shared> among threads -- an another one, due to the fact that the
shared object files loaded via C<XSLoader> aren't recorded here either.
Nick Ing-Simmons gives an alternative way to get the file names from the
module names given in C<@DynaLoader::dl_modules>.

    http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20031125041718.GB15868%40mdssdev05.comp.pge.com

=head2 Exporter::import

A patch by Fergal Daly to implement

    use Exporter ´import';

was applied ; this allows a package to get Exporter's import() method
without all the fuss of inheriting from Exporter.

=head2 Clarifications about closures

Glenn Linderman asked some questions about lexical variables, pragmas,
eval() and closures. Dave Mitchell, while noting that the current
documentation needs to be completed, provided some insight.

    http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=3FC3D338.606%40nevcal.com

=head2 In Brief

Mike Pomraning proposed a patch to add a new, optional second parameter to
C<threads::shared::cond_wait()>, to be used as a separate lock variable.

    http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=Pine.LNX.4.58.0311232311320.5397%40localhost.localdomain

Shlomi Fish finds that perl's core documentation is of poor quality,
compared to the online documentation for other languages. He wants to
start a project to improve them. This starts a long thread, probably due
to the irritating manner he sometimes has to state things.

    http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=Pine.LNX.4.56.0311271106250.29160%40vipe.technion.ac.il

Test::Harness 2.38 was integrated in bleadperl. It provides a new
standalone C<prove> utility, to run tests against Test::Harness.

    http://search.cpan.org/~petdance/Test-Harness-2.38/bin/prove

Just in time for the summary, Nicholas Clark released a snapshot of
maintperl, Sunday at 23:59 +0000.

    http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20031130235945.GB23801%40plum.flirble.org

POSIX::isalpha(undef) (and the other isXXX() functions) segfault, as of
perl 5.8.2 (bug #24554). Sadahiro Tomoyuki provided a fix.

=head2 Christmas in advance for the bug admins

Thanks to Robert Spier, perlbug has been updated to the latest version of
Request Tracker, RT 3.

=head2 About this summary

This summary was brought to you by Rafael Garcia-Suarez. Weekly summaries
are available on L<http://use.perl.org/> and via a mailing list, which
subscription address is L<perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org>. Feedback (and
patches) welcome.
