=head1 This Week on perl5-porters (30 June / 6 July 2003)

As the next maintenance release of perl is getting closer, the porters are
still fixing bugs. Among the subjects that have been investigated this
week, we can remember some hash-ordering-dependent bugs, process name
problems, and more syntactic issues.

=head2 Hashes that bite

The hash seed randomization patch that was introduced last week (see our
previous summary) uncovered some nasty bugs in perl and in its test suite.

Craig Berry discovered a bug in the order of destruction of weak
references. This was fixed by Dave Mitchell.

Enache Adrian noticed that rebuilds were made quite more often. This was
caused by some shuffling of the keys in the generated Config.pm.

There were some hash-order dependent tests as well, sometimes the cause
being deeply hidden in the harness, or in the internals of Test::Builder.

Paul Johnson says that he expects I<some very impressive fireworks when
this gets out into the wild>. And in fact Slaven Rezic obtains random
failures with HTML::Mason (that would be caused by Exception::Class)
and SOAP::Lite.

=head2 Setting C<$0>

Andreas Koenig and Jarkko Hietaniemi were (once again) working on the
problem of setting the C<$0> variable and having it change the name by
which the operating system knows the perl process. The problem is, of
course, how to cope with the ideas the various platforms have about it.

=head2 perl581delta

Jarkko began to work (with the help of the porters) on the next
incarnation of the F<perldelta> manpage, to be bundled with the upcoming
perl 5.8.1. And he released a large number of maintperl snapshots. Release
candidates are obviously getting closer.

=head2 More syntax weirdness with indirect objects

Dave Mitchell gives a snippet of code :

  sub f { f a; } f a;

where the first C<f a> is an indirect method call, using the indirect
object notation (it's equivalent to C<< a->f() >>), whereas the second
C<f a> is equivalent to C<f(a)> (with C<a> being a bareword).

I'd say this particular syntax oddity is sub-optimal, -- but the indirect
object syntax is hairy.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-07/msg00066.html

=head2 Harness speed

Abigail complained that Test::Harness prints a counter at each test, thus
augmenting the amount of time needed to run large number of tests. This
ended up in a patch. As says Andy Lester, Test::Harness' maintainer,
I<now, when you run a test harnessed, the numbers don't fly by one at a
time, one update per second.> (In the same thread, Gurusamy Sarathy
recalls the HARNESS_NOTTY environment variable, that suppresses progress
messages.)

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-07/msg00212.html

=head2 Briefly

Jarkko, after a suggestion by Robin Barker, added a new utility
in perl's source distribution, F<Porting/Modules>, to list the official
maintainers of the modules (this is mostly useful for the modules that
have a dual life on CPAN). Michael Schwern pointed out that he was
reinventing the Module::CoreList wheel ; and Jarkko removed this
F<Modules>.

Dan Kogai explained that FreeBSD comes with an implementation of malloc()
that is optimized for paged memory, and safe from duplicate free() calls.
But the downside is that realloc() is very slow. That's usually not a big
deal, because most programs don't use realloc() very often -- but perl
does. (The default configuration of perl on FreeBSD is to use perl's
internal malloc, that hasn't this realloc limitation.)

James Jurach provided a patch to use 32 bit integers instead of 16 bit
integers for line numbers. As it didn't seem to increase the size of cops
on several platforms, it went in.

Steve Grazzini produced a patch for the C<my SLICE> syntax we discussed
last week. Its implementation was criticized ; and it wasn't applied.

As Randal L. Schwartz reported, the initial value of C<@INC> (and
directory installation scheme) of perl on MacOS X has to be cleaned up, as
it causes problems with C<make install UNINST=1> (a sub-optimally
documented MakeMaker feature, used to uninstall previous versions found in
C<@INC>).

Vadim Konovalov provided more WinCE portability patches, with threads and
fork emulation.

Tels pre-released Math::BigInt v1.65, Math::BigRat v0.10, and bignum v0.14.
Michael Schwern released MakeMaker 6.10_07.

Perl 5 turned 20000 patches old.

=head2 About this summary

This week's summary was written by Rafael Garcia-Suarez. Weekly summaries
are published on F<http://use.perl.org/> and on a mailing list, which
subscription address is L<perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org>. Comments,
corrections, additions, and suggestions are (as always) welcome.
