=head1 This Week on perl5-porters (10-16 February 2003)

Here is the popular digest of the Perl 5 porters mailing list for the
second week of February. Featuring new proposals, new command-line
switches, new ideas, and fixes for all sorts of bugs.

=head2 lvalue length

Fergal Daly asked why C<length($a)> isn't a lvalue. This would allow to
trim a string by changing directly its length. But there is a problem :
defining the proper behavior when the length of $a has to grow. Should $a
be kept unchanged, or should it be blank- (or null-) padded ? For this
reason, Hugo decided that length() isn't going to return a lvalue yet.

    http://archive.develooper.com/perl5-porters@perl.org/msg91851.html

=head2 Unexpected scientific notation

Abigail reports (bug #20827) that a large number (1597009560 ** 2) is
sometimes print by perl as an integer, and sometimes in the scientific
notation. When this square operation has been constant folded, the number
is stored by perl as an integer, but when it occurs at run time, perl uses
a floating point value, hence the difference in output.

    http://archive.develooper.com/perl5-porters@perl.org/msg91899.html

=head2 gzipped modules

FranE<ccedil>ois Pons proposed a patch to allow to load gzipped modules,
via the PerlIO-gzip layer. Slaven Rezic pointed out that this
functionality was probably not worth being put in the core, because it can
be implemented via the coderef-in-@INC feature.

    http://archive.develooper.com/perl5-porters@perl.org/msg91999.html

=head2 The -C Unicode switch

Jarkko Hietaniemi implemented the C<-C> command-line switch he proposed
some weeks ago. This switch (with additional option letters) can be used
to control perl's Unicode behavior : for example, to turn on/off the
utf-8-ness of the standard input or output, or of input files supplied on
@ARGV. This new flag will be available in perl 5.8.1 as well.

    http://archive.develooper.com/perl5-porters@perl.org/msg91815.html

=head2 Namespace pollution

To address a namespace pollution issue raised by John Lenz, Jarkko
implemented a new C preprocessor symbol, PERL_NO_SHORT_NAMES, which
prevents the #definition of the short form of any of the C<Perl_*>
symbols.

    http://archive.develooper.com/perl5-porters@perl.org/msg91954.html

=head2 In brief

Our pumpking, Hugo van der Sanden, who was quite busy those last weeks,
caught up with the developments. Most notably, the patch that Salvador
FandiE<ntilde>o sent in November to add assertion support to Perl is
now in.

Rafael Garcia-Suarez implemented a new function in Scalar::Util, that
allows to change the prototype of a function.

Jos Boumans proposed (with a patch) to advertise Test::More and
Module::Build in the perlmodstyle man page.

Fergal Daly imagined a new, more concise way to invoke Exporter, and sent
a patch to implement his idea.

Bug #20920 pertains to the new safe signal implementation in perl 5.8.0 :
apparently, when a signal handler is running, the corresponding signals
are not blocked, whereas they should be. This can lead to segfaults.
Slaven Rezic provided a fix.

Bug #20912, fixed by Enache Adrian, is about a split() on a utf-8 string
that causes the unusual error message I<Split loop> to be thrown.

Mark Mielke produced a strange case of core dump, involving ties and
auto-references.

    http://archive.develooper.com/perl5-porters@perl.org/msg91991.html

Jarkko reminds us that someone has to make sure that the C<fields>
pragma still works, now that pseudo-hashes have been removed. (The plan
being to use read-only hashes.) That could be a bite-sized task for
someone. (And while we're at it, there are still traces of the old 5005
threads to be cleaned up.)

    http://archive.develooper.com/perl5-porters@perl.org/msg92000.html

=head2 About this summary

This summary brought to you once more by Rafael Garcia-Suarez. Summaries
are available on F<http://use.perl.org/> and/or via a mailing list, which
subscription address is F<perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org>. Comments and
corrections are welcome.
