=head1 This Week on perl5-porters (12-18 May 2003)

This week, discussions spawned across : manual pages, and their adaptation
to perl's audience ; build problems ; interfaces ; conventions ; and the
usual amount of bugs.

=head2 Working on man pages

Shlomi Fish proposed successive incarnations of several patches to the
perlsyn and perldata manpages. Casey West, Tom Christiansen, and others,
commented.

Looking at Shlomi's patches, Michael G Schwern noticed a lot of references
to other languages in perl's core documentation -- mostly to Unixish
little languages (sed and awk) and to C. In spite of their historical
interest, those references are no longer relevant to most readers of those
documents nowadays. So he decided to do something about it.

    http://xrl.us/h7g

And by the way, while Casey posted a patch to replace all occurrences of
I<catenate> by I<concatenate>, Tom explained the subtle difference between
those two words.

    http://xrl.us/h7h

=head2 A new version of Getopt::Long

Johan Vromans uploaded to the CPAN an alpha version of his module
Getopt::Long (2.32_03) which implemented automatic support for --version
and --help flags (based on a patch by Ilya Zakharevich). Quoting
the announcement : I<Since this is a non-compatible API change, the new
features will only be available to programs that explicitly require
version 2.3203 or later.>

This unconventional way to enable these new features was discussed and
adapted, after the problems it caused were sorted out.

    http://xrl.us/h7i

For the latest state of the module (2.32_05), see :

    http://xrl.us/h7j
    http://search.cpan.org/src/JV/Getopt-Long-2.32_05/CHANGES

=head2 Build problems

Gerrit P. Haase and H. Merijn Brand were investigating build problems
under the latest snapshots of the Cygwin environment (1.5.0s). At some
point they suspected a broken header file, but the problem seems to be
deeper. Anyway, bleadperl builds (almost) correctly on the more stable
Cygwin 1.3.22.

Enache Adrian tried to build bleadperl on Windows 2000 with MS Visual C.
He gets several failures, and also reminds us about bug #21473
(C<sysread()> and C<syswrite()> don't process CRLF correctly).

    http://xrl.us/h7k

Alain Barbet gets smoke failures, building perl on NetBSD on a Sparc 64
hardware, but apparently upgrading gcc helps a lot. He's going to try with
the very recent gcc 3.3, that has also been installed by Merijn on his
smoke systems. However, perl + long doubles still fails on AIX 4.3.3 with
this latest compiler.

=head2 Multidimensional array emulation

David Nicol remarks that the (little-known) multidimensional array
emulation works when written C<$hash{$x,$y}>, but not in the construct
C<$hash{@array}>. That's because the subscript must be a list, so it's
necessary to employ some syntactic trick, as C<$hash{@array,()}> to get it
working.

    http://xrl.us/h7l

Later, Rafael asks whether this feature should be deprecated, and after
discussion, the answer appears to be no.

    http://xrl.us/h7m

=head2 Alpha version numbers

Elaine Ashton noticed that I<the documented method of denoting an alpha
module release and the way that PAUSE and C<search> denote them do not
match>. This remark was triggered by the upload on CPAN of a module that
has a C<X_YY>-style version number.  C<search.cpan.org> understands this
to be an alpha version number, while PAUSE, for doing so, requires that
the distribution filename matches C</d\.\d+_\d/>, and moreover it looks
into the module(s) for $VERSION scalars.

    http://xrl.us/h7n

=head2 In brief

Back in January, Jarkko Hietaniemi asked for a couple of new README
documents, README.macosx and README.linux. But they were never written.
Perhaps before 5.8.1 ?

Jarkko also released a maintenance snapshot, and he asked, for the last
time, for a list of most wanted fixes to go in 5.8.1.

Tassilo von Parseval, who remarked last month that C<h2xs> was not able to
handle C enums, proposed a patch for it. It adds an C<-e>/C<--omit-enums>
command-line option, to disable the proposed new default behavior, that
is to process enums. (Bug #21887.)

Ilya Sandler reported bug #22181, a case of core-dump involving a
combination of C<foreach()> and C<goto()>. Dave Mitchell and Enache Adrian
hunted it down.

Dave Mitchell remarked that the construct C<$hash{$foo}>, where $foo is
undefined, doesn't give a warning when %hash is empty. That would be a
bug.

Michael Fowler reported a weird parsing bug (#22231) caused by the presence
of the C<Switch> module in a program, and of a comment containing the word
"switch".

MIME::Base64 was upgraded.

=head2 About this summary

This summary was brought to you by Rafael Garcia-Suarez. Weekly summaries
are available on L<http://use.perl.org/> and via a mailing list, which
subscription address is F<perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org>. Feedback
is (as always) welcome.
