=head1 This Week on perl5-porters (8-14 September 2003)

Any busy week for the porters, ends with a busy week-end for the
summarizer (old saying). Your traditional weekly summary is out,
and many subjects of interest are featured inside.

=head2 About hash randomization

Elizabeth Mattijsen asks for a way to know whether hash seed randomization
is in effect or not in perl 5.8.1 or above.

A first hint is to look at the Config variable C<$Config{ccflags}> to see
whether C<-DNO_HASH_SEED> has been specified or not, indicating whether
perl's support for random hash seeding is turned on. But there's also a
runtime setting involved, the C<PERL_HASH_SEED> environment variable ; and
Config is not intended to store settings that vary at runtime. Finally,
Jarkko Hietaniemi added a function hash_seed() to the core module
Hash::Util, that returns the seed, (and consequently 0 when no seed is
used.)

The discussion then digresses about ways to make Config.pm or charnames.pm
lighter.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-09/msg00414.html

=head2 Reducing memory footprint

Talking about making modules lighter, Elizabeth submitted several patches
to reduce the memory usage of some heavy modules, (C<Config> and
C<warnings>), when used in a multithreaded perl application. She achieved
this by replacing some carefully chosen lexical variables by global
variables declared with the C<:unique> attribute, so they're shared
between threads.

But Liz' patch to C<warnings> uncovered a bug, by an amusing side-effect
(it triggerred a failure in the regression test for C<O.pm>) : in a perl
interpreter configured without threads, declaring a variable with the
C<:unique> attribute loads the C<attributes> module, which shouldn't be
necessary for built-in attributes. This was fixed by Rafael, just in time
for the 5.8.1 code freeze.

=head2 Testing the debugger

The regression tests that Andreas Koenig wrote for the debugger last week
were proven to be rather unportable, as multiple test failures showing up
in the smoke matrices demonstrated. Jarkko retracted them, waiting for the
debugger to be made more testable (e.g. by making it able to read commands
from a file, and write output to another file.) And he added, half
jokingly : I<if someone desperately needs a hobby, for 5.10 I would
suggest a mad^Wambitious project of rewriting the debugger from scratch>.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-09/msg00515.html
    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-09/msg00524.html

=head2 The hard job of porting

Some of the smoke tests on Cygwin were showing alarming failures lately.
They're difficult to trace, because, as Jarkko says, I<the configurations
people have vary a lot, and what works over here won't work over there,
and vice versa...> Radu Greab finally found that the blame was to be put
on a bug in getpwuid_r() in the latest Cygwin (1.5.3-1). Jarkko then
checked in gratefully Radu's patch, labelling it as I<Radu Greab is my
hero.>

=head2 The word on order of evaluation

Smylers usefully pointed at a statement by Larry that clarifies the
position of Perl 5 and Perl 6 about the definedness of evalution order of
complex expressions, that was discussed lask week :

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-09/msg00512.html

=head2 is_deeply()

There was some discussion about the proper semantics of
Test::More::is_deeply() between Fergal Daly and Tony Bowden, that spawned
several mailing lists (p5p, code-review-ladder and perl-qa so far.) Should
it ignore the packages the references might have been blessed into ?
Should it do it even when those packages overload operators that may have
influenced the comparison routines ? What is the final and definitive
answer ?

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-09/msg00571.html

=head2 In Brief

Peter Prymmer is working on the portability of perl on VMS. Notably he was
sorting out with Ken Williams what should be the policy of File::Spec
regarding operating systems where filesystems use volume names. Ken
released new alpha versions of File::Spec. See for example :

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-09/msg00740.html

Jeff 'japhy' Pinyan discusses about possible optimizations on regular
expressions that begin with a atom that potentially matches the null
string, such as C</\s*,\s*/>.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-09/msg00477.html

Jos Boumans remarks that C<perl> accepts to run a directory, sort of.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-09/msg00804.html

Abigail reports bug #23790, about foreach() being unable to iterate
correctly over a list returned by a lvalue subroutine.

Redvers Davies is interested in updating the minimal files that are
absolutely needed to get a core perl compiled and running. He needs this
information to release packages for the Zaurus. (The list can be found at
the end of the INSTALL document.)

John Peacock released version.pm version 0.32.

=head2 About this summary

This week's summary was crafted by Rafael Garcia-Suarez. Summaries are
published weekly on F<http://use.perl.org/> and on a mailing list, which
subscription address is F<perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org>. Corrections
and comments are welcome.
