=head1 This Week on perl5-porters (11-17 August 2003)

The next maintenance release of Perl approaches, but the porters want to
take the time to do it right. Meanwhile, discussions and bug reports
continue to occur, as usual. Read about new and old documentation,
valgrind, backwards [in]compatibility, and other stuff.

=head2 Manpages

The F<perlreftut> manpage is currently distributed with Perl under a
restrictive license that doesn't make it completely freely redistributable
and that is apparently not compliant with the Debian Free Software
Guidelines. Its copyright is currently owned by The Perl Journal, but
Mark-Jason Dominus (author of this document) is trying to obtain it. If he
succeeds he will rerelease it under a more standard license.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-08/msg01100.html

Meanwhile, a new manpage, F<perlcheat> (the perl cheat sheet), crafted by
Juerd, was added to the perl core documentation.

=head2 valgrinding

Jarkko Hietaniemi added a C<test.valgrind> make target, to run the core
test suite under valgrind, a memory access debugger for Linux/x86. This
shakes out some errors, indicating potential or actual bugs.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-08/msg01262.html
    valgrind : http://developer.kde.org/~sewardj/

=head2 Warnings

Elizabeth Mattijsen is heavily testing the perl 5.8.1 release candidates
with her thread (and non-thread) modules. She's able to produce error
messages like I<Attempt to free unreferenced scalar> or I<Scalars leaked>
-- notably with the C<Thread::Tie> and C<Thread::Pool> modules.

She also notes that, now that warnings are automatically enabled when
running tests (unless otherwise specified), test suites that used to seem
perfectly working could be now proven flawed. (Not mentioning potential
failures due to random hash key ordering.)

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-08/msg01073.html

=head2 PerlIO layers

Stas Bekman, facing a problem with the handling of STDIN and STDOUT with
mod_perl 2 when there are PerlIO layers pushed on those handles, asks for
a way to replace the worker PerlIO layer. Nick Ing-Simmons explains some
of the details about the PerlIO internals.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-08/msg01045.html

=head2 Scripts for porters

Jarkko decided that it would be a good thing to bump up all version
numbers of core modules that have changed since 5.8.0. Slaven Rezic
provided a script to find in two Perl source trees modules that have
changed but have the same version numbers. (Slaven also wrote another
script to identify all modules with a dual life on CPAN, whose
F<Makefile.PL>'s do not contain something like C<< INSTALLDIRS => perl >>.

Jarkko also asked for a script to regenerate [parts of] all files that use
a list of the standard documentation pod files (various makefiles, table
of contents generator, etc.) Nicholas Clark studied the problem and posted
the state of his unfinished work so far.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-08/msg01084.html

=head2 In Brief

Rafael Garcia-Suarez asks for more regression tests, notably for some of
the basic parts of the interpreter that might be undertested and/or
undocumented (for example, numeric/string conversion). This would most
probably be useful for Ponie.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-08/msg01077.html

Abigail finds that the snippet C<$x=~(0,0)> produces an obscure error
message : I<Too many arguments for regexp internal reset>. (Bug #23328).
But should it be a syntax error at all ?

Alan Burlison, who set up an impressive smoke suite on several different
Solaris boxes, gets random failures from them : some of them were
apparently cured by using a non-parallel make for C<make _test>.

Hugo explained why some long-deprecated features are not likely to be removed.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-08/msg01212.html

gcc 3.3.1 was released ; it doesn't seem to cause major problems.

=head2 About this summary

This week's summary was written by Rafael Garcia-Suarez. Summaries are
published weekly on F<http://use.perl.org/> and on a mailing list, which
subscription address is F<perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org>. Corrections
and comments are welcome.
