=head1 This Week on perl5-porters (15-21 September 2003)

Those weeks, the perl 5 porters are in maintenance mood. Or in
maintenance mode, if you prefer. Read about the progress made in the
5.8.x and 5.6.x branches.

=head2 A strange error case in bleadperl

Stas Bekman posted a code snippet that produces the fatal error
I<Modification of a read-only value attempted> with bleadperl, but not with
perl versions <= 5.8.1. (Filed as bug #23803.) It can be reduced to :

    for("a") { for $x (1,2) { local $_="b"; s/(.*)/+$1/ } }

This was the consequence of a previous bug fix. Rafael explained that in
perl 5.9.0, any attempt at changing the value of a localized readonly
magic scalar will fail with this error. Before, it used to silently do
nothing, and the assignment C<$_="b"> was a no-op : this could lead to
difficult and well-hidden bugs. In bleadperl, readonlyness of magical
scalars is now preserved when localisation occurs.

But, will you say, where is the magic in the above snippet ? In fact, it
appears that the substitution C<s/(.*)/+$1/> adds some magic to the scalar
stored in C<$_>. This kind of magic is used internally by the regular
expression engine. Thus, one can say that the behaviour reported by Stas
is an unfortunate side-effect of the implementation of regular
expressions.

    http://xrl.us/tvu

=head2 Configure and gcc 3.4

Enache Adrian, watchful on the portability front, forwards a mail from the
gcc development mailing list. A change in gcc's behaviour in the 3.4
development branch leads to breaking perl's F<Configure> script ; more
precisely, it breaks the way F<Configure> tests for the existence of a
function in the standard library.

This was followed by a scary C wizardry thread. Enache provided a fix.

    http://xrl.us/tvv

=head2 In Brief

Jarkko Hietaniemi released several snapshots of perl 5.8.1. The next
release candidate approaches. Extensive tests have been done with mod_perl
1 and 2, and this uncovered several problems, both in mod_perl and in
perl.

Speaking about snapshots, Rafael released one of perl 5.6.2. It's OK on a
large number of platforms ; adjustments are needed on Mac OS X and Cygwin
at least. Rafael incremented the version number, so it reports itself as
being C<5.6.2>.

The bulk of the discussion focused on portability on various platforms --
mainly the non-Unix ones, VMS, OS/2, Windows and Cygwin. Peter Prymmer
reported that perl now looks good on VMS 7.3-1, with no regression test
failing.

Ilya Zakharevich and Yves Orton reported a few bugs in Test::Harness.

Stas Bekman noticed that with perl 5.8.1, if a socket gets closed by the
server while printing to it, the client gets a SIGPIPE. It wasn't
happening in perl 5.8.0 or earlier. (This is considered a feature, not a
bug.)

Michael Schwern released base.pm version 2.03, which fixes an obscure
(and ancient) bug on attribute inheritance, when an intermediate class has
no fields.

=head2 About this summary

This week's summary was produced by Rafael Garcia-Suarez. Summaries are
published weekly on F<http://use.perl.org/> and on a mailing list, which
subscription address is F<perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org>. Corrections
and comments are welcome.
