=head1 This Week on perl5-porters (3-9 November 2003)

This week was undoubtedly a maintenance-oriented week, as it has seen the
release of perl 5.8.2, and of perl 5.6.2 RC1. But of course and as usual
this wasn't the only topic on the always active p5p list. Read below for
the full details.

=head2 5.8.2

After a final release candidate 2, Nicholas Clark uploaded the final
perl 5.8.2 to CPAN. Nicholas plans to release maintenance tarballs
regularly, the next one being scheduled for new years eve.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-11/msg00313.html

Some build problems are reported, though : apparently perl 5.8.1 and 5.8.2
have problems on HP-UX 11, on AIX 5 with gcc 3, and on Solaris 9 with gcc
and 64 bit integers.

=head2 5.6.2-RC1

But the cycle of maintenance releases is not finished yet. Rafael
released the RC1 of perl 5.6.2. See the announcement :

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-11/msg00444.html

Some problems are still to be fixed, notably (it appears) on Mac OS X.

=head2 More on UNIVERSAL

Michael Jacob has some ideas about improvements that could be made to
the UNIVERSAL class, root of all Perl classes. His proposals are that
can() ceases (in some future release) to search methods in UNIVERSAL
(except when UNIVERSAL is specifically mentioned in @ISA), and implement
smart versions of AUTOLOAD(), DESTROY(), and import() in UNIVERSAL.

Michael Schwern argues that this functionality should go in an
UNIVERSAL::AUTOLOAD module on CPAN, but that it's too dangerous to be put
straight into UNIVERSAL, even after a deprecation cycle.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-11/msg00180.html

=head2 MakeMaker woes

Michael Schwern released ExtUtils::MakeMaker 6.18, 6.19 and 6.20. (6.19
fixed a test glitch, 6.20 contained mostly Windows and Cygwin fixes.) It
was discovered by upgrading bleadperl to the latest MakeMakers that the
core module SDBM_File was making too many assumptions about MakeMaker's
internals. This was fixed, but the generated makefiles still don't work
with non-GNU makes.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-11/msg00175.html

(To be noted : 5.8.2 and 5.6.2-RC1 still ship with MakeMaker 6.17.)

=head2 Relocatable tests and installation

Ilya Zakharevich proposes a patch to make core tests relocatable, so that
they can be run against an installed perl. His method is to add an
environment variables that prevents those tests to adjust @INC to their
needs.

    http://www.google.com/groups?threadm=20031031094825.GA27776%40math.berkeley.edu

Ilya also provided several patches to fix various flaws in the
installation process of perl ; some of them are specific to OS/2. The last
one proposes to add to C<make install> a C<PREFIX=/some/dir> argument.
Some discussion follows, about how this PREFIX differs from the existing
DESTDIR, and what are the actual usages for those flags.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-11/msg00260.html

=head2 Blocking and non-blocking reads

Stas Bekman asks about which read() APIs provided by perl are blocking,
and which ones are not. Mark-Jason Dominus explains that I<'blocking' and
'non-blocking' refer to the behavior of 'read' on certain file descriptors
when there is *no* data available.> They're not a property of the system
call, but of the file descriptor. Dan Sugalski and Tom Christiansen
provide some more insight.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-11/msg00135.html

=head2 In Brief

Brian Ingerson wins the prize of the funniest mail of the week.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-11/msg00425.html

Is the perltoc manpage useful ?

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-11/msg00099.html

Stas Bekman asks also whether the hash rehashing scheme in perl 5.10 will
be the 5.8.1 one or the 5.8.2 one.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-11/msg00139.html

Stas also reports (bug #24404) that it's possible to write C<require
"dir"> where F<dir> is a directory. require() should check that its
argument isn't a directory.

Alan Burlison asks for the plans on maintaining binary compatibility in
perl 5.8.x where x > 2. Nicholas answers that he wants to keep future
maintenance versions compatible.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-11/msg00119.html

Ilya Zakharevich provided a patch to speed up sprintf().

Scott Roy reports that calling exists() on a shared hash for a
non-existent element may crash perl (bug #24407). Dave Mitchell provides a
fix.

=head2 About this summary

This summary was once again written by your usual summarizer and 5.6.2
pumpking,  Rafael Garcia-Suarez. Summaries appear weekly on
F<http://use.perl.org/> and on a mailing list, which subscription address
is F<perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org>. Corrections and comments are
welcome.
