=head1 This Week on perl5-porters (18-24 August 2003)

The Perl 5 porters are rather focused on perl 5.8.1 tuning and
adjustments. Smokes, valgrind checks, modules updates, and regression bug
hunting were among the main events of the week.

=head2 DESTROYing blessed code refs

Last year, Simon Cozens found that blessed code references weren't
DESTROYed properly (bug #10030).  Dave Mitchell looked at it, and
diagnosed that it's caused by the fact that the blessed anonymous
subroutine is not a closure (usually) -- and indeed, turning it into a
closure fixes the behaviour of the destructor. Dave thinks that this bug
would be inefficient to fix, and suggests to document it as a misfeature.

Later in the thread, the proper meaning of the I<closure> word is discussed.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-08/msg01300.html

=head2 More valgrinding

Last week, Jarkko Hietaniemi added to the test harness the possibility to
run the test suite under valgrind. This week, helped by Marcus
Holland-Moritz and other members of the crowd, he slightly tweaked
valgrind's setup to produce more useful and accurate reports. Some
interesting bugs are shaked out.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-08/msg01455.html

=head2 Localization of C<$|>

Stas Bekman found a new bug in the localization of the C<$|> variable.
This bug wasn't present in perl 5.8.0, and causes significant problems
with mod_perl 2. Dave Mitchell identified himself as the guilty patcher,
explained the problem, and provided a better version of his original
patch.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-08/msg01438.html

=head2 In Brief

Jari Aalto wishes that here-documents could be declared with the quote
operators syntax, as in : C<< <<q(FOO) >>, C<< <<qq(BAR) >>, etc. (bug
#23348). This doesn't seem to be unreasonable.

Tassilo von Parseval added to Devel::PPPort, the backward compatibility
wrapper for XS code, some adapters for the C<grok_*> functions, that
convert strings to numbers. (See a recent F<perlapi> manpage for the
description of those functions.)

Enache Adrian fixed the handling of utf-8 strings in error messages.

Richard Dawe provided a portability patch for perl 5.6.2 on DJGPP. Philip
Newton is testing perl 5.8.1 on DJGPP as well.

Michael G Schwern cleaned up a bit Pod::Html.

=head2 Smoke news

Alain (alian) Barbet was busy on the portability front. He found out that
some pack() tests fails on NetBSD/sparc, compiled with gcc 2.x. This is
apparently due (after investigating with Nicholas Clark) to a bug in
C<**>. (bug #23463).

Alain also released a new version of his Test-Smoke-Database distribution
on CPAN, a software that presents and summarizes smoke results via a web
interface.

Abigail started to produce smoke results for perl 5.6.2. One of the tests
for int() fails when perl 5.6.2 is compiled with 64 bit arithmetic, due to
a transitional known bug in his version of glibc. (A workaround for
this bug was put in perl 5.8.0.)

=head2 Module news

Dan Kogai released Encode 1.98. Michael Schwern released
ExtUtils::MakeMaker 6.16. And I see on CPAN that CGI.pm 3.00 is out.

Moreover, Ken Williams proposed to backport Cwd to CPAN, with the recent
tainting fixes in it.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-08/msg01422.html

=head2 About this summary

This week's summary was written by Rafael Garcia-Suarez. Summaries are
published weekly on F<http://use.perl.org/> and on a mailing list, which
subscription address is F<perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org>. Comments and
corrections are welcome.
