=head1 This Week on perl5-porters (28 April / 4 May 2003)

This week summary doesn't feature very exceptional bug fixes, or utterly
important information, or pearls of the most pleasant sense of humor of
the perl5-porters. Does this mean that it's completely non-interesting ?
Read it and judge by yourself : shortcuts, ACLs, meta-information, and a
couple of cows.

=head2 Windows shortcuts

Last week, Edward Peschko started a discussion about adding support for
Windows shortcuts (F<.lnk> files) in the perl core. He asked whether the
C<lib> pragma could be modified to support the syntax

    use lib "shortcut.lnk";

Several approaches were suggested : modifying readlink() on Windows, to
handle shortcuts, or have a Windows-specific module that redefines
CORE::readlink(). Several people noted that a shortcut is not the same
thing at all than a symlink, and thus that perl should not cheat about
readlink() and paths involving symlinks.

    http://archive.develooper.com/perl5-porters@perl.org/msg94878.html

=head2 ACL support, and the filetest pragma

Stas Bekman remarks that some OSes use ACL (Access Control List) -based
file access controls. He asks whether perl could use internally the
equivalent of

    POSIX::access($file, &POSIX::X_OK)

instead of C<-x $file>, where access(2) is supported.

Mark Mielke points out that the filetest operators are not (in the general
case) equivalent to the access(2) mechanism, due to a possible difference
between the effective user id and the real user id. And backward
compatibility should be preserved. Jarkko Hietaniemi recalls that the
C<filetest> pragma should be used modify to the semantics of filetests.

    http://archive.develooper.com/perl5-porters@perl.org/msg94966.html

Later, Slaven Rezic asks whether C<filetest> works at all. This pragma is
supposed to be lexically-scoped, like C<strict>. It is not, because it
tests the compiler hints at run-time, but they are only relevant at
compile time. This was fixed by Jarkko and Slaven.

=head2 Cows

Aaron Sherman asked about copy-on-write : how it's supported, and whether
it's going to become the default. (Reminder : perl can be compiled with
the C<-DPERL_COPY_ON_WRITE> cc flag, which enables copying string values only
when they're changed.) He's looking for ways to improve the performance of
SpamAssassin, a tool that processes lots of strings if any, and apparently
tries to implement a module to provide COW-enabled magic scalars. Nicholas
Clark summarized the state of the copy-on-write feature : I<the good news:
I can't measure any slowdown. The bad news: I can't measure any speedup.>

    http://archive.develooper.com/perl5-porters@perl.org/msg96172.html

=head2 Meta-information in CPAN packages

Autrijus Tang posted a detailed proposal about the inclusion of a standard
F<META.yml> file in CPAN distributions, and the inclusion therein of some
meta-information that could be used by the CPAN indexer, to prevent some
files or directories from being indexed. Ken Williams noted that
Module::Build was already able to generate a F<META.yml> file. Autrijus'
proposal was extensively discussed in a long thread :

    http://archive.develooper.com/perl5-porters@perl.org/msg95986.html

=head2 C<$VERSION>

John Peacock is apparently about to post a patch that makes the $VERSION
variable magical, so that it automagically turns version-like scalars
assigned to it into version objects.

Matthew O. Persico asks about the possibility to backport John's changes
via a CPAN module.

    http://archive.develooper.com/perl5-porters@perl.org/msg96211.html

=head2 In brief

Casey West continued to send doc patches and to close doc bugs. And
indeed, due to general effort, a lot of bugs were closed. By the way,
Robert Spier is organizing the PerlBugAthon, aimed at closing as many
perlbugs as possible, during OSCON 2003's Hackathon.

    http://www.perl.org/oscon/2003/perlbugathon/

Gurusamy Sarathy warns that there are probably cases of non-thread-safety
in perl 5.8.0, because some global variables have gone into F<perlvars.h>,
instead of being put into F<intrpvars.h>. Sorting them out is needed.

    http://archive.develooper.com/perl5-porters@perl.org/msg95215.html

Rafael Garcia-Suarez provided a patch to get bleadperl working on SCO
OpenUNIX 8.

Tye McQueen proposed a simple patch to fix a bug in hash bucket assignment
(the number of buckets not growing in some pathological cases).

Richard Clamp posted a quick-fix patch to get perl 5.005_03 to compile on
newer Linux distributions.

    http://archive.develooper.com/perl5-porters@perl.org/msg95227.html (long)

Brent Dax asked why regex-heredocs aren't allowed (something like C<<
$string =~ <</FOO/ >>). Perhaps because they're not really needed.

=head2 About this summary

This summary was brought to you by Rafael Garcia-Suarez. Weekly summaries
are available on L<http://use.perl.org/> and via a mailing list, which
subscription address is L<perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org>. Feedback (and
patches) welcome.
