=head1 This Week on perl5-porters (23-29 June 2003)

This week's p5p summary is going to be a bit unusual : a few very long
threads will be summarized (logically) in longer paragraphs. Read about
hashing algorithm vulnerabilities, new proposed syntax, CHECK and INIT
blocks, and other unlittle things.

=head2 Algorithmic Complexity Attack, continued

The discussion that started last week about the possibility of algorithmic
attacks on perl hashes (bug #22371) found its conclusion. Jarkko
Hietaniemi proposed several successive iterations of a patch.

Here's the final state : unless the C<-DUSE_HASH_SEED_EXPLICIT> or
C<-DNO_HASH_SEED> preprocessor symbols are given to the Configure script,
perl's internal hashing algorithm will use a random start value (called
the I<hash seed>). This value can be overriden via the C<PERL_HASH_SEED>
environment variable. That means that if you have a program that uses a
hash, with a constant set of keys, inserted in the same order, the
ordering of the output of keys() will different between different
executions of your program.

At some point Nick Ing-Simmons suggested to introduce a new attribute to
declare "repeatable" hashes :

    my %hash : predictable;

or

    my %hash : lock_order;

Jarkko made a failed attempt at implementing it, but as anyway people
seemed to dislike it, or to not like it enough (finding it overkill), it
wasn't kept.

The thread starts at F<http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-06/msg00584.html> -- and it counts more than 100
messages.

Now what would be interesting is to have some benchmark results, on
different platforms. Using SpamAssassin (per Nicholas Clark's suggestion)
seems to be a good idea.

=head2 Hash mysteries

Jarkko finally applied his randomized hash seed patch, and two failures
appeared randomly in the smoke test reports. The first one was caused by a
piece of code that used to iterate wrongly over the keys of readonly
hashes. The second one, in a test for Encode::Alias, was more difficult to
hunt down. It was caused by an inconsistent definition of an encoding name
alias, making the test effectively dependent on hash key ordering.

=head2 My slice

Jarkko proposed a new syntax : the ability to declare a hash I<and>
initialize a slice of it at the same time :

    my @hash{@keys} = (values...);

Mark-Jason Dominus approves, but wonders why C<my($h{$k})> shouldn't be
accepted either. Rafael Garcia-Suarez proposes a one-line proof-of-concept
patch to allow the syntax C<my(@hash{qw/keys/})> (with parentheses --
otherwise modifying the parser is necessary). Hugo van der Sanden worries
that this may mislead users in expecting that C<local @hash{@keys}> works
analogously, by emptying %hash first, and thus pronounces himself against
this idea.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-06/msg00859.html

=head2 CHECK and INIT blocks

Marc Lehmann reports (bug filed under number 22826) that I<neither CHECK
nor INIT blocks are executed when require() is used to load a module>.
Rafael provides the explanation (and sheds some light on the unclear
points of the documentation) : CHECK and INIT blocks are executed during
the transition between the compilation phase of the main program and its
execution. Thus, they're executed at only one point during the lifetime
of the perl interpreter, and once the main program has been compiled,
they're never executed again. (This explains the existence of the warning
C<Too late to run CHECK/INIT block>.)

Rafael points out that the B compiler suite actually relies on the
current behaviour, and that it seems to be well adapted to other profiling
or analysis tools, such as Devel::Cover. Gurusamy Sarathy recalls that
Larry wished the CHECK/INIT blocks be run once per optree. Apparently that
would be a job for a new kind of special block.

The state of the equivalents of CHECK, INIT, BEGIN and END blocks in Perl
6 seems to be mostly unclear to the P5P crowd, although Arthur Bergman
crafted a module that provides PRE and POST to Perl 5 (Hook::Scope).

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-06/msg00905.html
    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-06/msg00921.html

=head2 Perldoc and Cygwin

Gerrit P. Haase sent a patch for Pod::Perldoc on Cygwin, to disable the
default use of man(1) to format output, because man is apparently broken.
Perhaps something to do with groff. Merijn applied the patch. John Peacock
found a workaround : setting the environment variable C<LESS=-R> (or
C<--RAW-CONTROL-CHARS>) instead.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-06/msg00767.html

=head2 In brief

Johan Vromans posted a RFC to choose a default way to handle multiple
valued options in Getopt::Long. Nobody commented.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-06/msg00816.html

Alan Burlison had a look at the build process (on Solaris), and he notices
that C<perl> is linked against libraries it doesn't actually use. He's
investigating it.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-06/msg00848.html

Gurusamy Sarathy and Ed Avis talked about releasing Data::Dumper on CPAN.
This raises the question of the test suite, that should work over all perl
versions, which implies not relying on hash key order. But Jarkko did just
fix that test suite to enable the C<Sortkeys> option to Data::Dumper
(related to his hash seed patches). Brian Ingerson points out that YAML
might be a better tool than Data::Dumper for a large number of uses of
Data::Dumper.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-06/msg00971.html

A new Perl Repository Browser has been put on line on ActiveState's side.
The URL hasn't changed.

=head2 About this summary

This summary was brought to you by Rafael Garcia-Suarez. Weekly summaries
are available on F<http://use.perl.org/> and/or via a mailing list, which
subscription address is L<perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org>. Comments,
additions, multiplications, corrections, and suggestions are welcome.
