=head1 This Week on perl5-porters (21-27 July 2003)

This week, a lot of porters went to YAPC::Europe in Paris, so the list
traffic on the list was less important. It wasn't less interesting.

=head2 Compile-time division by zero

Ed Avis doesn't like the fact that C<1/0> is a compile-time error, and not
a runtime one (Bug #23061). In other words, he argues that

    use constant N => 0;
    if (N) { $x = 1/N; }	# example number 1
    eval { $x = 1/N; }		# example number 2

should be legal code -- constant folding, being an optimization, should
not change a program's meaning. (He notes also that the equivalent program
in C is legal -- although Michael Schwern points out that C compilers
shouldn't really be used as a guideline for designing perl errors.) On the
other hand, Kurt Starsinic thinks about early detection of divisions by
zero as a I<feature>, not a bug.

Hugo van der Sanden describes what should be done to solve this problem :
fatal exceptions thrown during constant folding must be caught and abort
folding, instead of aborting the whole interpreter.

    http://xrl.us/nis

=head2 Checking whether a method exists

Jeff 'japhy' Pinyan suggested that one could overload C<exists>, so that
C<< exists THING->method >> would be equivalent to C<< THING->can('method') >>.
Dave Mitchell doesn't like this new syntax proposal, and says I<yuck>.

    http://xrl.us/nit

=head2 Panther

Dan Kogai had access to a box running an alpha version of Panther -- the
next release of Mac OS X. He reports that the version numbers appear to be
messed up in the perl 5.8.1 that comes bundled with Panther ; Edward Moy
(who maintains Apple's version of perl) blames CVS expanding keywords when
he imported the perl sources, and is going to fix it. Ken Williams says
that the CVS manuals recommend against using the C<%Revision%> keyword to
generate release versions, to prevent this kind of problem.

    http://xrl.us/niu

=head2 In Brief

Ken Williams finds that -T used with a filehandle sometimes doesn't seem
to return the appropriate result. (Bug #23077).

Sean M. Burke asks for new regression tests for Perldoc ; regression
tests are good.

Ilya Zakharevich proposes to add a new built-in function,
C<Internals::find_script()>, to emulate the B<-S> command-line option.
Michael G Schwern disagrees on using the C<Internals> namespace (and
points out that there's already a module on CPAN called C<Internals>.)

    http://xrl.us/niv

Stas Bekman finds a problem with perlio layers : if one pushes a layer
onto a stream, it's not popped when the filehandle is closed. Nick
Ing-Simmons replies that the Popped method should return zero in order to
actually pop the layer.

    http://xrl.us/niw

Stas asks also for a way to get a complete list of the dual-life modules,
in order to include a file C<META.yml> in the perl 5.8.1 distribution.
(This was an idea suggested at the P5P BOF in Paris. A summary of this
meeting will be posted at some appropriate time by Elizabeth Mattijsen.)

New modules were released : ExtUtils::MakeMaker, File::Spec, Time::Local.
Hugo released a snapshot of bleadperl.

=head2 Meanwhile, in ponie-dev

The very first step of the development of Ponie has been made : there is
now a Subversion repository for Ponie, in which Arthur Bergman imported
the current bleadperl and bleadparrot. Now, the goal is to get to
configure and build (portably) a perl containing an embedded parrot.
(Reminder : Ponie is I<Perl On New Internals Engine>, namely Perl 5
running on Parrot.)

=head2 About this summary

This summary was written by Rafael Garcia-Suarez, back from YAPC::EU.
Weekly summaries are published on F<http://use.perl.org/> and on a mailing
list, which subscription address is L<perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org>.
Comments, corrections, additions, and suggestions are (as always) welcome.
