=head1 This Week on perl5-porters (1-7 September 2003)

September begins, holidays are over. Lots of little new things occured
this week. Read about lexical pragmas, syntax warnings and good style,
advancement of the maintainance branches, bugs, fixes, tests and upgrades.

=head2 Extensible lexical pragmas

Mark-Jason Dominus, in a sudden and impressive burst of creativity, posted
a patch to implement extensible lexical pragmas in Perl 5. So what does
this mean ? Basically he found a way to store, during the compilation of a
Perl 5 program, variables related to lexical scopes, that can later be
retrieved and used. Currently perl does this fully for some pragmas only
(C<use strict 'refs'>, C<use integer>, etc.) and in a non-extensible way.
Moreover Mark-Jason's implementation provides a C<pragma> module which
goal is to help the future authors of lexical pragmas.

However, this patch is not finished, and has to be carefully tested and
improved. It's a very promising starting point, though.

    http://xrl.us/sos

=head2 First snapshot of 5.6.2

While the work on 5.8.1 testing and stabilization is continuing, Rafael
released a first snapshot of what should become perl 5.6.2 in a not too
long amount of time. This led to tests and fixes. Yves Orton provided a
fix to MakeMaker on Windows. Rafael decided to copy the platform-specific
configuration hint files from bleadperl to 5.6.2.

    http://xrl.us/sot

=head2 print (...) interpreted as function

Abigail finds the above warning unuseful and demands it to be removed, on
the basis of three considerations : it's issued for sensible and valid code,
such as

    print (3);

Moreover it's not issued for some buggy code, where it should be issued :

    print  (1 + 2) * 3;    # note the two spaces after print here

and finally the statement C<print(1+2)*3> already gives the warning
I<Useless use of multiplication (*) in void context>. Also, sort() is
subject to the same warning, but no other built-in.

As expected, the porters quickly divide into two camps. Abigail provided
a patch to suppress the warning, but no verdict was given.

    http://xrl.us/sou

=head2 C<map> in void context

This wasn't the only controversial discussion. Tassilo von Parseval,
following a piece of opinion posted by Abigail on comp.lang.perl.misc,
provided a patch to optimize away the result of C<map> when it's called in
void context, making it almost as fast as a C<for> loop. A discussion on
the stylistic use of C<map> in void context ensued, raising the question
of whether it should trigger a warning or not.

    http://xrl.us/sov

=head2 Order of evaluation

Mark-Jason Dominus asks whether the order of evaluation of some binary
operators is defined ; for example, whether the C<.> concatenation
operator guarantees that its left-hand side will be evaluated before its
right-hand side. The question is more about the future implementations of
Perl (or Ponie) than about the past ones. The answer is undefined.

    http://xrl.us/sow

=head2 C<Safe> holes

Guy Albertelli demonstrated that within a string of perl code to be
evaluated by Safe::reval(), some lexical variables from Safe were
available. (Bug #23656.) This is related to the fact that eval'ed code
sees its lexical context. As perl 5.8.1 contains fixes that allow nested
evals to still see their full lexical scope, this bug is actually more
serious in 5.8.1 than in previous versions. Hopefully, Dave Mitchell
provided a fix.

    http://xrl.us/sox

Moreover, Benjamin Goldberg found out that it's possible to exit from a
block evaluated in a Safe compartment by using C<last LABEL> or another
similar construct (provided that LABEL is a valid label in the program at
the point where the Safe compartment is used.)

    http://xrl.us/soy

=head2 In Brief

Abhijit Menon-Sen provided a patch to implement a new syntax,
C<< <DIRHANDLE> >>, making the angle-bracket operator an equivalent of
readdir() when operating over a directory handle. Mark-Jason Dominus
provided a link to an old discussion in comp.lang.perl.moderated about
the potential problems caused by this feature.

    http://xrl.us/soz

Yitzchak Scott-Thoennes posted a patch to document that the C<import> and
C<unimport> methods don't get autoloaded. But, at the same, he asks
why they aren't autoloaded.

    http://xrl.us/so2

Jarkko Hietaniemi asks the brave porters to fetch the patches to perl some
OS vendors apply to their distributions, just to see if something
interesting can be found.

    http://xrl.us/so3

Andreas Koenig wrote a test framework for the perl debugger. (There are
currently no regression tests for it.)

Enache Adrian is continuing his work on the ByteLoader module, which
apparently is taking a good shape. It was completely broken in 5.8.0.

David Dyck reports (bug #23731) than on his Linux machine, the string
returned by perl to represent the infinite IEEE floating point value has
leading spaces. That would be a libc bug.

Unicode::Collate version 0.27, then 0.28, were released, as well as
Data::Dumper 2.121. This last one, backported to perl 5.6 by Ilya
Martynov, was integrated into perl 5.6.2.

The F<perlreftut> manpage is now distributed under the same terms as
perl itself. That means that it can be reintegrated into Debian.

=head2 About this summary

This week's discussions were summarized by Rafael Garcia-Suarez. Summaries
are published weekly on F<http://use.perl.org/> and on a mailing list,
which subscription address is F<perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org>.
Corrections and comments are welcome.
