=head1 This Week on perl5-porters (16-22 June 2003)

This week, there was fewer threads than usual, but they were larger, so
the volume of mail exchanged on p5p remained more or less constant. Here's
the high signal-to-noise ratio summary for this week.

=head2 Algorimic Complexity Attack

You might remember that last month, Scott Crosby reported (as bug #22371)
a way to produce colliding hash keys. Once fed into a hash, these may
severely degrade performance of element lookup, and thus be used as a
basis for DoS attacks. Jarkko proposed a way to protect hash tables
against this : instead of using 0 as initial value for the computation of
the hash value, as it is now, use some pseudo-random value, computed at
interpreter startup time.

This raises two interesting questions : is this a significant threat ?
And how to enhance the hash function without performance degradation ?
Hopefully the arguments ended in some interesting benchmarks. To be
continued.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-06/msg00584.html

=head2 Clearing $1

Dan Kogai thinks that it would be a good idea, if a failing match did
reset the C<< $<digit> >> variables to C<undef>. This opinion is not
universally shared. SeveralLots of arguments are proposed against this
change, from backwards compatibility to good coding practices.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-06/msg00497.html

=head2 siginfo

Jarkko Hietaniemi proposed an experimental patch to take advantage of the
POSIX signal handling feature that goes by the name of I<siginfo>. It
enables additional information to be passed to signal handlers : sending
process id, real user id of sending process, etc. (See your sigaction(2)
manpage if you have it.)

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-06/msg00559.html

=head2 Selected bugs

Perl segfaults during C<make install> on Mario A Cruz Gartner's FreeBSD
4.4 box (bug #22740). That's puzzling because C<make> and C<make test>
both succeeded.

Shlomi Fish and Ton Hospel reported bug #22744, demonstrating an old
problem with the C<.=> operator :

    $b = ($a.="5")."6"; print "$a $b"

prints "56 56", but it should have been "5 56". Enache Adrian provided a
fix.

=head2 About this summary

This week's short summary was written by Rafael Garcia-Suarez. Weekly
summaries are available on F<http://use.perl.org/> and/or via a mailing
list, which subscription address is L<perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org>.
Comments, corrections, additions, and suggestions are welcome.
