=head1 This Week on perl5-porters (9-15 June 2003)

This was a quiet week -- summer approaches -- but a few interesting points
were raised. New warnings, portability points, and miscellaneous bugs are
covered in this summary.

=head2 A new printf warning

Following-up to bug report #22599, Robin Barker added a new warning, in
the I<printf> category : I<Newline in left-justified string for printf>.
It's issued if a string to be left-justified by printf() or sprintf() (via
the C<%-ns> format) contains a newline.

=head2 C<$\> in a foreach() loop

Ton Hospel reports (bug #22613) that if the loop variable used in a for()
loop is C<$\> (the output record separator), then this new value doesn't
in fact affect the behavior of print(). It should.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-06/msg00215.html

=head2 C<make> oddities

Andy Dougherty reports some test failures for ExtUtils with maintperl on
Solaris 8. They're caused by a difference between GNU make and Sun make,
in handling commands split over several lines.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-06/msg00254.html

=head2 fork() portability on BSD

Alan Ferrency investigated bug #18849 : on some recent versions of FreeBSD
(or other *BSD, including Mac OS X), if the SIGCHLD handler is set to
'IGNORE' and a child process is forked, then all subsequent system() calls
made in the parent process will hang until the previously forked child has
exited. The confusion comes from the SA_NOCLDWAIT flag, how it's defined,
implemented and supported by different UNIX vendors. See the thread for
the portability round-up (Tru64, Solaris, Linux, AIX, IRIX). This ended in
a patch (#19765) specific to BSDish OSes.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-06/msg00364.html

=head2 untie() partially working

Aaron J Mackey finds that an untie() from within a FETCH or STORE is
broken with perl 5.8.0. It worked in previous perls. He proposed a patch
that reverts to the internals of untie() as they were in 5.6.x, but the
root of the problem is not clear.

    Bug:   http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-06/msg00365.html
    Patch: http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-06/msg00422.html

=head2 In brief

Rafael removed the C<$*> special variable. See last week's summary for
why. Using it still triggers a warning, though.

Anthony Heading manages to get a panic error out of the regular expression
compiler. The offending regexp is C</(?:()?)?/>.

Steve Grazzini found out that a recent change in the formatting of the
filetest entries in perlfunc broke perldoc.

Dan Kogai tested perl on FreeBSD 5.1. He suggested to use perl's malloc()
instead of the system's one, which is too slow in perl's context.

Ilya Zakharevich proposed a lot of little OS/2 patches. This notably
includes a test fix for MakeMaker. He also worked on perl's malloc().

=head2 About this summary

This week's discussions were summarized by Rafael Garcia-Suarez. Weekly
summaries are published on F<http://use.perl.org/> and/or via a mailing
list, which subscription address is L<perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org>.
Comments, corrections, additions, and suggestions are welcome.
