=head1 This Week on perl5-porters (22-28 September 2003)

Perl 5.8.1 was released. 'Nuff said.

=head2 The Release

Jarkko Hietaniemi began the week by releasing the last candidate, perl
5.8.1 RC 5, which was extensively tested on all available platforms and
with lots of CPAN modules.

Then, three days later, he finally uploaded the final tarball of 5.8.1 to
the CPAN, leaving for a well-deserved vacation, applauded by the whole
crew for his wonderful job.

    The Official Announcement : http://xrl.us/uoz

Jarkko retiring from pumpkineering (a word that ispell must be told
about), Nicholas Clark is now the new 5.8.x maintenance pumpking.
Public acclamations.

    The Plan for 5.8.x : http://xrl.us/uo7

=head2 Phalanx

Andy Lester announced the Phalanx project, aimed at creating a solid
testing base for Perl 5 and Ponie, through extensive tests of the most
important CPAN modules.

    http://xrl.us/uwf
    http://qa.perl.org/phalanx/

=head2 C<-i> and symbolic links

Pekka Savola reports (bug #24000) that when perl is given the C<-i> switch
(in place edition of input files), the symbolic links are replaced by
modified plain files, but the file they point to is not modified. Although
perl could be made to edit the linked files through @ARGV modification,
it's not clear what kind of DWIMmery should be implemented here by
default, the old one being at least backwards-compatible. Aaron Sherman
points out that the behavioral change would be better done at the C level,
and not via an error-prone perl module (due to symlink chains and other
relative pathnames madness).

    http://xrl.us/uwg

=head2 Overloading log()

Tels reports that it's not possible to overload log() (via the C<overload>
pragma) and make it accept more than one parameter. (Bug #24016). Rafael
suggests to define an overriding log() subroutine instead. Mark-Jason
Dominus gives further details.

    http://xrl.us/uwh

=head2 The C<:locked> attribute

Elizabeth Mattijsen notices that the C<:locked> subroutine attribute,
documented in the C<attributes> manpage, is relevant only to the old
5005threads model. Then she makes a patch to turn it into a compile-time
error if used with ithreads, intended to go in 5.8.x. But support for
C<:locked> should be completely removed from the 5.9.x branch, as
5005threads are no longer supported.

    http://xrl.us/uwi

=head2 Readonly local values

The code snipped that was posted last week by Stas Bekman and that
produced a I<Modification of a read-only value attempted> error in
bleadperl is now permitted again. Rafael fixed it in a way that, when a
magic variable is localized, the readonly flag is propagated I<only> if its
kind of magic can handle value affectations. This should protect from
bugs as well as minimizing the annoyance for the programmer.

=head2 In Brief

Rick Delaney proposed a patch to fix the behaviour of require() setting or
not setting keys in %INC when it tries to load a module that has
compilation errors. His patch arranges for failures to be cached in %INC
as undefined values.

Mark-Jason Dominus reports that overloaded operators don't seem to work
with blessed functions (bug #24033). Yitzchak Scott-Thoennes explains
that the issue is that the overload magic flag is on the reference, not
on the referent.

David Buckley reported a couple of segfault cases in Data::Dumper,
involving threads and/or large recursive structures (bugs #23965 and
#24013).

Gabor Szabo looks for the P5P FAQ. The old FAQ Simon Cozens crafted is now
outdated. Rafael promises to update it, and Robert Spier to upload it
to F<http://dev.perl.org/>.

Tels released Math::BigInt 1.66, just in time for 5.8.1.

=head2 About this summary

This week's summary was produced by Rafael Garcia-Suarez. Summaries are
published weekly on F<http://use.perl.org/> and on a mailing list, which
subscription address is F<perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org>. Corrections
and comments are welcome. Next week, I'll take a break, and will be kindly
replaced by Elizabeth Mattijsen.
