=head1 This Week on perl5-porters (6-12 October 2003)

    summary++ # new week.

=head2 5.8.x binary compatibility

Chip Salzenberg notices some binary incompatibility issues between perl
5.8.0 and perl 5.8.1 : some XS modules built under 5.8.0 don't run
properly with 5.8.1 without being recompiled. This is due to the new hash
randomization feature. Running perl 5.8.1 with the environment variable
C<PERL_HASH_SEED=0> fixes it. Chip suggests a more general fix --
basically to move the hash seed to a global variable instead of a function
argument -- and says that 5.8.2 should be released quickly. His idea is
further discussed.

    http://xrl.us/wuu

=head2 XS Constants and threads

Michael J.Pomraning reports (bug #24138) that the value returned by
File::Glob::GLOB_ERROR() does not seem to be isolated between differents
threads. Rafael tries to trace the bug up to ExtUtils::Constant, with no
success.

    http://xrl.us/wuv

=head2 When you load UNIVERSAL

Slaven Rezic reports that explicitely loading the UNIVERSAL module
breaks things, because F<UNIVERSAL.pm> defines an import() method (aliased
to Exporter::import()), which is thus inherited by all classes whenever
F<UNIVERSAL.pm> has been C<use>'d.  Michael G Schwern provides a patch,
ensuring that UNIVERSAL::import() does nothing when invoked on anything
else than the UNIVERSAL package.

    http://xrl.us/wuw

=head2 C<set*uid> calls broken on Mac OS X

Bug report #24122 details how the C library calls C<setruid>, C<setrgid>,
C<setreuid>, and C<setregid> are broken on Mac OS X, and how they affect,
consequently, perl's C<< $< >> and C<$(> variables, for scripts that want
to drop privileges. Slaven Rezic suggested that they should be disabled
at configuration time.

    http://xrl.us/wux

=head2 Filetest operators syntax

Ton Hospel reported (bug #24127) that filetest operators don't follow the
rule that applies to other named unary operators, I<if it looks like a
function it's a function>. Rafael Garcia-Suarez documented this fact more
clearly in the perlop manpage.

    http://xrl.us/wuy

Following his internal stream of consciousness, Rafael then submitted a
patch to allow to stack filetest operators, i.e. to write :

    -f -w -x $file

instead of :

    -x $file && -w _ && -f _

although he doesn't think that allowing C<-fwx $file> in Perl 5 would be a
good idea.

    http://xrl.us/wuz

=head2 Extending the defined() and exists() syntax

Roy Johnson posted some insteresting ideas about possible extensions to
defined() and exists().

    http://xrl.us/wu2

=head2 Handling attributes at runtime

Daisuke Maki found out that attribute handlers are not invoked when
defined in a file sourced at run-time. That's because they're by default
run at CHECK-time, and CHECK blocks are only invoked once during the
lifetime of the perl interpreter : just after the global compilation
phase.

    http://xrl.us/wu3

=head2 When you C<goto +foo>

Juerd reported (bug #24108) that you can't C<goto +foo> to go to the label
whose name is returned by the function foo(), because perl actually tries
to go to SCALAR(0xDEADBEEF), the stringified form of the reference to the
return value of foo(). xmath proposed a fix, that got applied.

    http://xrl.us/wu4

=head2 When C<ref($foo) == 0>

Abigail remarked that Perl's documentation says that C<ref> returns a true
value if its argument is a reference, and false otherwise, and that this
statement is not entirely true, since it's possible to bless a reference
into a class named C<0>. This edge case was sufficient to give birth to a
long thread.

    http://xrl.us/wu5

=head2 When a module loses its XS part

James FitzGibbon notices that pure-perl modules are installed later in the
@INC path than XS modules. Consequently, if an XS module on CPAN is
replaced by a pure-perl version, it won't be seen by the users who will
upgrade it, hidden by the earlier version, still on the hard disk. Nick
Ing-Simmons proposes a solution : that this module still insists to be
installed in the architecture-dependent directory. Michael G Schwern also
points out that the prudent user can issue a C<make install UNINST=1>,
that searches @ISA for other versions of the same files and remove them.

    http://xrl.us/wu6

=head2 When you use a Turkish locale

Ismail Donmez reported (bug #24121) that perl's C<Configure> script can't
be run under a Turkish locale, because it actually tests for the uppercase
form of the letter 'i', which is not 'I' in Turkish (it actually
corresponds to Unicode character U+0130, also known as C<"\N{LATIN CAPITAL
LETTER I WITH DOT ABOVE}">).

    http://xrl.us/wu7

=head2 In Brief

Hugo van der Sanden is planning to release the first development version
after the 5.8 branch, i.e. perl 5.9.0, during next week.

Jos Boumans reports as bug #24182 that objects seem to loose their
overload magic during destruction (except when the DESTROY method is
called explicitely).

Gisle Aas, by (ab)using an undocumented feature (not unrelated to source
filters and @INC hooks), made perl dump core; later, he provided a fix.

Nick Ing-Simmons compared MANIFEST files to mitochondrial DNA.

=head2 About this summary

This week's summary was written by your regular summarizer, Rafael
Garcia-Suarez. Summaries are published weekly on F<http://use.perl.org/>
and on a mailing list, which subscription address is
F<perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org>. Corrections and comments are welcome.
