=head1 This Week on perl5-porters (13-19 October 2003)

What happens in the post-5.8.1 world ? Read about the plans for the
(nearest than you may think) 5.8.2, 5.8.1-specific problems, and other
Perl language and implementation questions.

=head2 Binary Compatibility

Nicholas Clark prepares himself to release perl 5.8.2, which should fix
the binary compatibility issue raised last week between 5.8.0 and 5.8.1.
The discussions are highly technical, since the fix should preserve binary
compatibility and at the same time preserve the security feature (the hash
seed randomization) which was introduced in 5.8.1 and that broke binary
compatibility.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-10/msg00633.html

The announcement of Nicholas' first snapshot can be found at
F<http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-10/msg00890.html>.

=head2 Version numbering

With all those version number increments around, a question was raised :
should perl's internal version number be incremented just after the
release of the previous version, or just before the release of the new
version ? Several arguments were raised. Usually, the tradition is to
bump up the version number before the first release candidate.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-10/msg00695.html

=head2 CPAN things

Ilya Zakharevich posted a patch containing several improvements to the
CPAN.pm module. This led to a discussion about IPC::Open3 (don't ask me
why...)

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-10/msg00498.html

Meanwhile, Randal Schwartz notices that the CPAN shell of perl 5.8.0
reports AutoLoader as I<to be upgraded> since 5.8.1 is out. Andreas Koenig
agrees that the shell should be silent about core modules that are not
(yet) dual-lived on CPAN.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-10/msg00561.html

=head2 getppid() and mod_perl

Stas Bekman reported that under mod_perl, built with perl 5.8.1 on Linux,
the perl built-in getppid() doesn't return the actual PPID of the httpd
process, as it should. This was the consequence of a change in perl 5.8.1,
that now caches the result of getppid(2) in an interpreter variable, which
is not updated when apache forks. (The rationale behind this change is
that the implementation of getppid(2) on Linux is not POSIX-compliant when
it comes to threads, and that Perl must be POSIX compliant when it can.)
Rafael Garcia-Suarez, responsible for the PPID caching, provided a patch
to mod_perl to fix this, and noted that a similar problem potentially
occurs with the $$ special variable (although it was already correctly
handled by mod_perl.)

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-10/msg00741.html

=head2 Dup'ing stderr

Abigail filed bug #24204 : I<older versions of Perl allowed you to dup
STDERR for reads, but newer versions> (i.e. 5.8.x) I<don't.> This disallow
the trick to open STDERR for reading from the keyboard when standard input
has been redirected to read from a file.

The discussion continues on the cleverness of Unix tricks, how and why
they should be supported by perl, and (permitted by Mark-Jason Dominus'
digging skills) POSIX compliance.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-10/msg00642.html

=head2 In Brief

Rafael released a new snapshot of perl 5.6.2.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-10/msg00694.html

Stas Bekman asked why the PERL5LIB environment variable is ignored when
taint mode is on.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-10/msg00764.html

Autrijus Tang added support for signing distributions in
ExtUtils::MakeMaker.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-10/msg00612.html

Richard Clamp is working on the perl bug triaging effort, via the
bugmongers mailing list. He posted an announcement draft :

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-10/msg00566.html

Following a suggestion by Alex Hudson, support for Linux abstract Unix
domain sockets were implemented. Those are basically like regular named
Unix domain sockets, but their name begins with a C<\0>, and they don't
live in the filesystem.

David Dyck found that the perl parser was fooled by non-existent filetest
operators (such as C<-F> for example.) (bug #24212.) This was fixed by
Rafael.

And, Perl 5 turned nine years old.

=head2 About this summary

This week's summary was once again written by Rafael Garcia-Suarez.
Summaries are published weekly on F<http://use.perl.org/> and on a mailing
list, which subscription address is F<perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org>.
Corrections and comments are welcome.
