=head1 This Week on perl5-porters (27 January / 2 February 2003)

Hi all, here's your weekly dose of bug and fixes. Fold constants, send
signals, leak memory and introspect layers through this week's summary.

=head2 Constant folding in conditionals

The C<?:> conditional operator is optimized away by perl when the
condition is constant. This leads to a strange behavior, reported as bug
#20444 by Ton Hospel : the following construct

    $_ = "foo"; print "foo" =~ (1 ? /foo/ : /bar/);

prints 1, because it's internally equivalent to :

    $_ = "foo"; print "foo" =~ /foo/;

But in fact it should print nothing, as it should be equivalent to

    $_ = "foo"; print "foo" =~ 1;

(this 1 being the value of C</foo/>, once evaluated.)

(of course, the proper way to mix regexps and C<?:> is to use qr//.)

    http://archive.develooper.com/perl5-porters@perl.org/msg91125.html

=head2 Signal handler configuration mess

Shevek reports (bug #20491) that assigning to C<$SIG{RTMIN}> results in a
segfault on his linux system. After having inspecting his configuration,
it appears that Configure has assigned the signal number -1 to SIGRTMIN.
Why, we don't know (yet).

    http://archive.develooper.com/perl5-porters@perl.org/msg91194.html

=head2 Minor leak

Bill Bennett spotted a minor memory leak in the freeing of subroutines.
Dave Mitchell found that I<one in every 64K ops will not be freed>, due to
a hack used by the B::C compiler backend, and Paul Johnson provided a
patch.

    http://archive.develooper.com/perl5-porters@perl.org/msg91265.html

=head2 gcc locale-dependent messages

The makedepend script (that calculates dependencies between source files)
is fooled by gcc 3.2.1, when run under a french locale (and probably other
non-english locales as well). That's because makedepend relies on the
output of gcc to do its job. Nicholas Clark thinks I<that gcc generating
programmatic output (not human output) that varies depending on locale is
a bug in gcc, and should be reported as such.> H.Merijn Brand proposes to
use weaker patterns to match gcc output. Rafael Garcia-Suarez proposes
also to force the C locale in makedepend.

    http://archive.develooper.com/perl5-porters@perl.org/msg91453.html

=head2 Run-time access to C<${^OPEN}> values

Autrijus Tang wanted a way to know what default PerlIO layers are used by
a given block of Perl code. He proposed a patch to open.pm to store this
information on a package per package basis. But as the open pragma is
lexically scoped, this approach wasn't sufficient. Rafael pointed out that
it's available from the op tree and provided a naive C implementation,
which was quickly turned into a module, Devel::Hints, by Autrijus.

Nick Ing-Simmons suggested that this runtime access to C<${^OPEN}> values
could be implemented in XS in the core, to be available in the open::
namespace.

    http://archive.develooper.com/perl5-porters@perl.org/msg91423.html
    http://search.cpan.org/author/AUTRIJUS/Devel-Hints/

=head2 In brief

John Peacock released version.pm v0.28, that I<now includes a subclass,
version::AlphaBeta, which demonstrates using alphanumeric version strings,
instead of strict numeric versions.>

Jarkko Hietaniemi hopes someone will write the documents README.linux and
README.macosx. (We have already 37 README documents, that provide notes
and installation instructions specific to various platforms, but those two
popular OSes lack documentation.) John Adams volunteered for OSX.

Rafael suggests to remove the obsolescent B<-u> command-line switch. Ton
Hospel says that it could be reused as "the Unicode switch", but Jarkko
objects that this could create strange problems when different versions of
perl are used.

Stephane Payrard notices that IO::Handle can't be used together with
Inline::Files, at least on perl 5.8.0. The origin of the problem is
unknown (but patches are welcome).

Jarkko released a snapshot of the maintenance branch of perl 5.8.

=head2 About this summary

This summary was brought to you, as usual, by Rafael Garcia-Suarez.
Summaries are available on F<http://use.perl.org/> and/or via a mailing
list, which subscription address is F<perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org>.
Comments, corrections and additions are welcome.
