=head1 This Week on perl5-porters (24-30 March 2003)

This week was a rather interesting week among the Perl 5 porters. Read
about pattern matching extensions, CPAN distribution issues, and various
bugs and problems.

=head2 New regexp flag proposed

Yitzchak Scott-Thoennes proposed a new flag, C</w>, to modify the return
value of the pattern match operator in list context. Basically it prepends
the value of $& to the list of returned values C<($1..$n)>.

Rafael Garcia-Suarez and Merijn Brand asked about the implied constructs
C<qr//w> and C</(?w)/> : these shouldn't be allowed since C</w> affects
the return value of the match, not the pattern itself.

Tim Conrow pointed out that C</w> conflicts with the Perl 6 switch of the
same name. Jos Boumans proposed C</r> instead. A new version of the patch
is in the works.

    http://archive.develooper.com/perl5-porters@perl.org/msg93670.html

=head2 A warnings.pm for old perls

Nicholas Clark forwards to P5P an idea of Simon Wistow : to release a
dummy C<warnings> module to CPAN, so that using lexical warnings in a
module doesn't also mandate at least perl 5.6.0. Stas Bekman then proposes
to create a Perl-Backport distribution, aimed at installing various
back-compatibility stubs based on the current perl's version. As he says,
I<CPAN module authors just need to include Perl::Backport in their
PREREQ_PM and it'll do the rest of the job.>

    http://archive.develooper.com/perl5-porters@perl.org/msg93632.html

=head2 A generic solution for dual-life CPAN packages

Stas Bekman made a proposal to help the CPAN indexer to distinguish
between the different distributions that provide a specific package, and
to decide which one should be installed by CPAN.pm / CPANPLUS. His
idea is to introduce a new variable, say $CPAN_MASTER_PACKAGE, to hold
the name of the master distribution containing a module. An alternative
option would be to include a file BUNDLED in the distribution, to list all
packages that are to be ignored by the indexer.

Andreas Koenig points out that the contents of the F<inc/> subdirectories
of CPAN distributions are currently ignored by the indexer. For example,
C<only-0.26> and C<PAR-0.66> come with Autrijus Tang's C<Module::Install>
distributed under F<inc/>. Autrijus notes that the C<inc> name is not yet
definitive and should not be relied upon. He also liked Stas' BUNDLED file
idea and suggested that this file could use the MANIFEST.SKIP syntax (i.e.
C<^inc/> to excludes files from F<inc/>).

    http://archive.develooper.com/perl5-porters@perl.org/msg93635.html

=head2 In brief

John L. Allen has problems compiling Perl 5.8.0 on AIX with long doubles
with the latest version of IBM's compiler (vac). Apparently Configure
isn't getting right the modfl support. He's working on this with Merijn.

    http://archive.develooper.com/perl5-porters@perl.org/msg93682.html

Doug Thayer reports a case of segfault, using GDBM in a threaded program
(bug #21699). Arthur Bergman says that the fix is probably to make
GDBM thread aware.

    http://archive.develooper.com/perl5-porters@perl.org/msg93648.html

Jean Forget reminds us that he put on CPAN an alpha version of an enhanced
C<diagnostics> module, containing bug fixes and support for
internationalization. Wolfgang Laun announces that he'll have a look at
it.

    http://archive.develooper.com/perl5-porters@perl.org/msg93652.html

Michael G Schwern announced a new alpha release of MakeMaker (version
6.06_03, then 6.06_04). Testers welcome.

    http://archive.develooper.com/perl5-porters@perl.org/msg93812.html

He also reported bug #21742 : encountering a C<require Foo::Bar> statement
invoked in void context and from an C<eval(STRING)> statement, perl 5.8.0
isn't able to compute correctly the module's return value, because it
provides a wrong context for it. (The correct context to be provided would
be scalar context, and perl actually provides void context in this case.)

    http://archive.develooper.com/perl5-porters@perl.org/msg93747.html

Juerd reports bug #21744 about B::Deparse. A code snippet is worth a dozen
words :

    $ perl -MO=Deparse -e'print "${foo}::bar"'
    print "$foo::bar";

Enache Adrian (which I haven't already mentioned, although he posted a
load of bug fixes this week, as usual) provides a fix.

    http://archive.develooper.com/perl5-porters@perl.org/msg93766.html

=head2 About this summary

This summary was brought to you by Rafael Garcia-Suarez. Weekly summaries
are available on F<http://use.perl.org/> and/or via a mailing list, which
subscription address is F<perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org>. Comments,
corrections, additions, and suggestions are welcome.

Special thanks to the metamark.net folks for providing this short url
service, and to Iain Truskett for WWW::Shorten.
