=head1 This Week on perl5-porters (14-20 April 2003)

Not a good week to stop smoking ! Test-wise, that is. In this week's
summary, read about configuration changes, language proposals, and the
usual amount of bug fixes.

=head2 Binary error messages

Marc Lehmann remarks that the current maintperl may produce error messages
that contain a null character (bug #21962), with the one-liner :

    ./perl -e '&{""}'

Abhijit Menon-Sen finds out that perl, trying to access a symbol that has
an empty name, sets explicitly the length of this name to 1, which seems
obviously wrong, and thus fixes the bug by suppressing this behaviour.

    http://xrl.us/gll

=head2 Long Doubles

There was a long thread, mainly involving Jarkko and Merijn -- the
Configure guys -- about Configure's support for long doubles. A patch for
long double support on Solaris (by Alan Burlison) was integrated. An
important question was raised, which was : if we ask Configure to enable
long double support in perl, (or, similarly, 64 bit integers), and if
Configure fails to detect support for it on the platform, should it abort
? The answer, for now, is yes. As a consequence, some holes appear in the
smoke matrices, corresponding to now-disallowed configs.

    http://xrl.us/gln

=head2 Ties, Fetches and Storabilization

The patch that Dave Mitchell sent last week, to allow nested C<FETCH>es, has
been applied. The benchmarks give varying results, which apparently are
due, as Dave says, to I<the usual cache noise effects>, which have been
encountered before. So this patch probably doesn't change significantly
the (already low) performance of ties.

Speaking about ties, C<Storable> now handles self-tied objects (bug
#17040, fixed), thanks to Abhijit. The question of serializing tied
objects is raised again ; David Nicol proposes the convention to use
SERIALIZE and DESERIALIZE special methods. Slaven Rezic points out that
C<Storable> uses already the STORABLE_thaw and STORABLE_freeze methods, if
they're available.

    http://xrl.us/glo

=head2 More on cross-compilation

Redvers Davies posted refactored patches to add support for
cross-compilation to perl. Jarkko is considering merging them into perl
5.8.1. Vadim Konovalov reminds us about the C<Cross.pm> module, created
during the cross-compilation process for WinCE, which is basically a
substitution for C<Config.pm> when cross-compiling (either perl itself, or
perl modules).

    http://xrl.us/glp

=head2 More black smoke

Nicholas Clark is struggling with strange smoke failures on BSD.
Unreproducibly, for some reasons, Makefile.PL expansion is going wrong
under crontab.

    http://xrl.us/glq

=head2 In Brief

Nathan Torkington notices that reading from a magic scalar with
C<PerlIO::scalar> sometimes causes coredumps. This buglet is fixed by
Enache Adrian.

Jarkko Hietaniemi finished to add a new function C<PerlIO::get_layers()>,
to retrieve the I/O layers for a given filehandle. Dan Kogai is excited
about it.

Bug #21979 demonstrates that, with an ithread-enabled perl, I<modifying an
alias to a read-only item of an argument list of a subroutine works, while
it's expected to fail.>

Arthur Bergman and Dave Mitchell are struggling with pads, ithreads,
cloning, and closures, and finally fix an obscure bug I don't understand.

Shlomi Fish posted a proposal to add three new keywords, C<class>, C<up>
and C<this>, to manipulate namespaces. He didn't get positive feedback.

=head2 About this summary

This summary was brought to you once again by Rafael Garcia-Suarez. Weekly
summaries are available on L<http://use.perl.org/> and via a mailing list,
which subscription address is L<perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org>.
Feedback welcome.
