=head1 This Week on perl5-porters (25-31 August 2003)

  Perl gait and post rate,
  The summarizer watches.
  Read it all below.

=head2 Cwd, XSLoader, CPAN

Ken Williams, who is going to release the Cwd module on CPAN, wants to
backport it to perl 5.005. However, this involves replacing XSLoader,
that it uses, by the older DynaLoader -- or, to use a backward
compatible boilerplate -- or, ultimately, to release on CPAN XSLoader
itself, as Michael Schwern suggested.

In fact, Michael even provided a small tarball of XSLoader, repackaged for
CPAN. He also wrote tests for it and cleaned it up a bit.

    http://xrl.us/rsv
    http://xrl.us/rsw

=head2 base.pm

While we're at it : Randal L. Schwartz reported that the version of the
C<base> module on CPAN (in the Class-Fields distribution) was higher than
the one currently included in perl 5.8.1.

Michael Schwern says that a backport of C<base> and C<fields> must remain
on CPAN. It's important to note that the CPAN and core versions of those
modules are functionally equivalent, their only difference being purely
internal. He added that Class::Field is a failure and should be left dying
slowly. Nevertheless, he separated the CPAN version of C<base> and
C<fields> from Class::Fields, which is going to CPAN as C<base-2.0>. He
also mentions that he's bored with those modules and I<would welcome
someone to take over the CPAN version>.

    http://xrl.us/rsx

=head2 C<next $label>

Mark-Jason Dominus wishes (bug #23614) that C<next> could support dynamic
labels, specified via a variable. (C<goto> supports this.) Enache Adrian
remarks that this isn't probably worth the performance penalty. Schwern
quotes Larry.

    http://xrl.us/rsz

=head2 Spambench

Nicholas Clark posted the code of C<spambench>, a simple script aimed at
benchmarking a perl interpreter against SpamAssassin and a known email
corpus.

His results so far : copy-on-write doesn't seem to make a difference in
speed (perhaps in memory usage ? there aren't memory statistics), and a
perl interpreter compiled with ithread support is slower by 4/5%.

    http://xrl.us/rs2

=head2 Parsing pod fast

Mark-Jason Dominus proposed a patch to improve the performance of
Pod::Parser. However, Marek Rouchal (who maintains Pod::Parser) rejected
it, for reasons pertaining to the correctness of the algorithm : he wants
the parse tree to contain no empty nodes and no consecutive text nodes.
Marek also says that Pod::Simple is nowadays considered a better
alternative to write pod parsers backends.

    http://xrl.us/rs3

=head2 tell() in append mode

Martyn Pearce reports bug #23645 : tell() returns 0 after having opened a
file in append mode with perl 5.8.x ; but perl 5.6.x returns the real file
position. Andreas Koenig finds that the patch that changed the behaviour
of tell() is a patch to the Linux compilation hints file, and indeed the
bug disappears if perl is configured with C<-Dd_stdstdio=define>. Jarkko
commited a fix, but labels it as I<probably wrong>.

    http://xrl.us/rs4

=head2 In Brief

Tim Jenness released File::Temp 0.14 (last week, in fact).

Lukas Mai reported that the prototypes for shift() and pop() should be
C<;\@> instead of C<\@>. Rafael fixed this, and added a regression test
for the prototypes of built-ins. (bug #23572.)

David Coppit reported (bug #23578) that the C<delete_package()> function
provided by the Symbol module is sometimes so zealous that the deleted
package can't be reloaded efficiently. Rafael explained this (and why it
won't probably be fixed in a near future.)

    http://xrl.us/rs5

Nicholas Clark filed a couple of bugs that were uncovered by valgrind
(#23753, #23576). One of them involves matching something against a
regular expression, and then introducing C<$&> at run-time via an
C<eval('')>.

Tassilo von Parseval found a strange bug involving the scoping of @- and
@+, used in a tied hash, accessed from the right-hand side of a
substitution (bug #23624). But the workaround is even stranger.

    http://xrl.us/rs6

=head2 About this summary

This week's summary was written by Rafael Garcia-Suarez. Summaries are
published weekly on F<http://use.perl.org/> and on a mailing list, which
subscription address is F<perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org>. Comments and
corrections are welcome. Yes I know, I'm not good at haikus.
