=head1 This Week on perl5-porters (8-14 December 2003)

In two words, this was a busy week. Various topics were discussed, from
the low-level C portability stuff to the Perl language considerations.

=head2 C<*DB*File::delete>

Paul Marquess brings to the general attention that the implementation of
C<delete()> in the DBM modules does not what the man page says what it
should do. This implementation glitch was due to efficiency reasons. He
wonders what's the right solution for this -- interface change or doc
change.

    http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=AIEAJICLCBDNAAOLLOKLCEILPEAA.Paul.Marquess%40btinternet.com

=head2 Concat slowdown

Stas Bekman notices that some form of concatenation of strings was
impressively slowed down after the release of perl 5.8.2. This change is
due to the removal of an aggressive optimization that went wrong on some
cases. No replacement for this optimization has been worked out yet.

    http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=3FD7BC46.8020600%40stason.org

=head2 Benchmark and bigint

Tels reports (bug #24622) that you can't use C<Benchmark> when you've
loaded C<bigint>. Hugo van der Sanden remarks that C<bigint> interferes
with C<Benchmark>'s use of floating point numbers. Tels then proposes
a patch to C<Benchmark> to cope with this, but Hugo believes that a more
correct solution would be to fix C<bigint> so its effect is lexical and no
more global. (And we're back to this old TODO item : fix lexical pragmas.)

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-12/msg00351.html
    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-12/msg00493.html

=head2 Tieing stashes

Tassilo von Parseval remarks that perl lets you tie stashes (symbol table
hashes). However, once tied, they don't work quite as expected. So it's
maybe a good idea to forbid tying stashes (unless we can make them work
correctly, for some acceptable value of correctly.)

On the other hand, one can mark stashes as read only, and this seems to
behave.

    http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=rt-3.0.7_01-24652-68283.15.7477948573825%40perl.org

=head2 A void context warning in boolean context

Gisle Aas reports that the following code :

    if ("") { do_something() }

produces a warning, I<Useless use of a constant in void context>. Rafael
comments and thinks that this one will be difficult to fix. (Bug #24646).

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-12/msg00510.html

=head2 In Brief

Scott Walters announces that he might have an occasion to add a Perl 5
backend to parrot.

    http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20031208082317.GA26642%40illogics.org

Tels posted a abstract of the current state of C<Math::BigInt> and
C<Math::BigFloat> (and pre-released C<Math::BigInt> 1.68).

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-12/msg00557.html

Steve Hay proposed to add a function C<Win32::IsAdminUser()>. Michael
Schwern proposes to put it in C<libwin32> instead. No Windows guru
comments.

    http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=3FD5E3F8.6070900%40uk.radan.com

Paul Marquess works on the DB_File and utf8 issue reported last week.

Enache Adrian works on old and new memory leaks. (E.g. bug #24624 for a
memory leak related to the new version object code.)

Enache also fixed a bug related to mishandling of utf8 strings by
substr().

    http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20031210203439.GA581%40math.berkeley.edu

Bug #24615 is, for once, about a case where perl's taint checks are too
zealous.

    http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=rt-3.0.7_01-24651-68277.9.65202065328413%40perl.org

Alan Burlison has problems building perl with a C99-compliant compiler.
This has something to do with C<#include> guards and obscure predefined
compiler symbols, that are in the source code of perl from ages. Some
cleanup is in order.

    http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=3FDA4994.6050209%40sun.com

Nicholas Clark, integrating changes to the perl 5.8 branch, remarks
that the recent fixes made to the C<$0> variable break C<PAR>.

    http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20031214210647.GF30930%40colon.colondot.net

Nicholas also released a snapshot of perl 5.8.x at the very end of the
week.

=head2 Quote of the week

I<This is the "camel grooming club" - we have to make the hair 
as unhairy as possible while making things work>. -- Nick Ing-Simmons,
speaking about P5P.

=head2 About this summary

This summary was compiled by Rafael Garcia-Suarez. Weekly summaries are
published on F<http://use.perl.org/> and posted on a mailing list, which
subscription address is F<perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org>. Corrections
and comments are welcome. (Yes, mixed archives. Baroque style.)
