=head1 This Week on perl5-porters (17-23 November 2003)

Due to my laziness, or perhaps to the lack of traffic on perl5-porters
this week, this summary will be rather short, but hopefully long enough
to provide your weekly dose of perl core information. Read on.

=head2 Hash revamp

Nicholas Clark proposes to refactor the code that manipulates hashes in
the code ; and he does so.

Before :

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-11/msg00759.html

After :

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-11/msg00966.html

He also fixed a remaining bug in the copy-on-write internal implementation
(not enabled in default builds).

=head2 More hashes

Alan Burlison's module Solaris::Kstat, which implements a tied hash
entirely in XS code. This module tends to dump cores with perl 5.8.2 ;
this is due to the fact that its implementation clashes with the new
restricted (read-only) hashes.

Digging further, he notices that in perl 5.8.2, locking an empty hash
produces a core dump, and provides a fix.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-11/msg00694.html

=head2 Non-hash stuff (or, In Brief, miscellaneous issues)

Paul Szabo proposes a patch to solve some security issues in suidperl.
Nobody comments.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-11/msg00814.html

Damian Menscher reports that under some conditions, running the perl test
suite can change the file permissions for C</dev/tty>. This unfortunate
side-effect is filed under bug id #24521.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-11/msg00849.html

Moeller Wolf-Dietrich reports (bug #24508) a case where the concatenation
operator has side-effects and produces the wrong result. Rafael fixes it
by disabling a buggy optimization.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-11/msg00799.html

Salvador FandiE<ntilde>o posts a patch for MakeMaker, to add support for
modules written in C++.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-11/msg00924.html

Chris Nandor reports that C<$^E>, a system-specific equivalent for C<$!>,
sometimes changes unexpectedly. Dan Sugalski comments that, as it reflects
the C variable C<errno>, it can change at any times, whenever a system
call or another library function (such as malloc()) sets it. However, in
this case, C<errno> should be saved and restored when it's copied in the
C<$^E> scalar (this happens correctly for C<$!>). Rafael fixes it.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-11/msg00881.html

Daniel Berger can't build a 64-bit perl on Solaris with gcc. Andy Dougherty
provides a fix. (bug #24439.)

Nicholas Clark wonders about the nuances involved in various ways of
creating mortal scalars in the perl core. The answers involve archeology.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-11/msg00831.html

Leon Brocard is I<getting confused about versions and Perl>, and asks for
a more or less reliable way to sort versions. John Peacock suggests
C<version.pm>.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-11/msg00981.html

Iain Truskett reorganizes a bit the documentation for PerlIO layers, which
is shuffled between the F<perlrun> and F<PerlIO> man pages.

Ton Hospel makes the regexp engine panic in 23 characters (bug #24524).

Bug #24526 demonstrates that index() and rindex() still don't play nice
with UTF-8 locales.

=head2 About this summary

This summary was brought to you by Rafael Garcia-Suarez. Weekly summaries
are available on L<http://use.perl.org/> and via a mailing list, which
subscription address is L<perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org>. Feedback (and
patches) welcome.
