=head1 This Week on perl5-porters (3-9 February 2003)

I'm not sure whether it's me or if the Perl 5 porters discussions were
actually a bit shorter than usual, but this week's summary, indeed,
appears to be a bit shorter than usual. This doesn't mean that it's
absolutely without interest.

=head2 Maintenance releases

Leon Brocard asked for the expected availability of the 5.005_04 and 5.6.2
releases. Notably, there are known fixes to allow building perl 5.005_03
and 5.6.1 with the newest versions of gcc and of the Berkeley DB. Gurusamy
Sarathy intends to release a 5.6.2, and adds that smoke tests results are
welcome. Tim Bunce and Nicholas Clark add that I<it's important that the
Perl community be seen to actively support at least one previous major
version.>

    http://archive.develooper.com/perl5-porters@perl.org/msg91424.html

=head2 Reducing op size

Stephen McCamant provided some ideas about removing the op_seq field from
the op node structure (more precisely, to reduce it to two flags). An op
could be reasonably identified by a couple (address, checksum of fields).
He also sent a patch for B::Concise to remove its dependency on op_seq.

    http://archive.develooper.com/perl5-porters@perl.org/msg91553.html

=head2 Seeking a safe signal test

Jarkko Hietaniemi proposes to add a new magic variable ${^SIGNAL_UNSAFE}
(or something) to restore locally the pre-5.8.0 "unsafe" signal behavior
when set to a true value.

He asks whether someone could provide I<sample code of where the safe
signals "reliably" gets it wrong>, to be used as a basis for tests for
this new feature. To be noted, this kind of tests are extremely dependent
on the platform.

    http://archive.develooper.com/perl5-porters@perl.org/msg91763.html

=head2 In brief

Robert Spier posted a handy list of untouched bugs, alongside his weekly
perlbug summary. He says that I<a bunch of em look easy>, and I feel
guilty : he's right.

Dustin Jones reports an interesting parser bug (#20716) : the lexical $x
in the double-quoted string below is not seen by perl :

    my $x = 'x'; print "${x}{";

(removing the C<my> solves the problem.) Enache Adrian provided a fix.

Dan Kogai reported that formats don't seem to play well with PerlIO and
Unicode strings. This didn't surprise Jarkko. Inaba Hiroto proposed some
patches to fix this.

Enache Adrian was busy solving several bugs related to C<goto> : segfaults
(#20154, #20357) and a newly discovered memory leak (#20777).

Ton Hospel reported three new regular expressions bugs (if I count
correctly).

Abigail requests that Test::Harness should provide a way to be optionally
silenced. Currently it prints a string for each test ran (the counter.)
This may take some time for large test suites.

H. Merijn Brand reports that Cygwin v1.3.20 now has nanosleep() and that
bleadperl successfully compiles and passes all tests on it.

=head2 About this summary

This summary brought to you by Rafael Garcia-Suarez. Summaries are
available on F<http://use.perl.org/> and/or via a mailing list, which
subscription address is F<perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org>. Comments and
corrections are welcome.
