=head1 This Week on perl5-porters (29 September - 6 October 2003)

It was relatively quiet in the aftermath of the release of Perl 5.8.1.

=head2 First bugs

Unfortunately, the first bugs in 5.8.1 were found also.  Some annoying,
such as a memory leak when initializing a shared array:

 http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-09/msg01615.html

and, more seriously, a bug with random numbers after fork() which basically
cause each child to get the same random numbers as the parent:

 http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-10/msg00037.html

Fortunately, the upcoming mod_perl release 1.29, will take this bug into
account when running with 5.8.1.  More bugs will no doubt be found and more
fixes will be made in the coming weeks.

=head2 Hidden Dependencies

Johan Vromans found some warnings when installing 5.8.1 RPM's that indicated
dependencies of core modules on non-core modules.

 http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-09/msg01644.html

This thread turned into a discussion whether Perl should / could be
responsible for packaging on different platforms.

 http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-10/msg00021.html

Some consensus was reached in that it was felt to be a good idea to supply
a META.yml file with each Perl distribution, which would allow packagers to
more easily package.

And then Ken Williams realized there suddenly was a META.yml in bleadperl.
With incorrect information.  But that all got sorted out:

 http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-10/msg00088.html

=head2 A bleadperl snapshot!

Hugo released a snapshot and fires up bleadperl development again!

 http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-10/msg00086.html

=head2 Documentation patches

A flurry of documentation patches started when Shlomi Fish returned to p5p:

 http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-10/msg00055.html

As a side note, Shlomi also started some action to refurbish learn.perl.org
on the Perl Advocacy list:

 http://www.mail-archive.com/advocacy%40perl.org/msg01816.html

=head2 64bit configurations

Michael Schwern found an(other) difference between 5.8.0 and 5.8.1.  This time
it involves configuration on 64bit platforms.  Previously, some configurations
would silently fall back.  In 5.8.1, they exit with an error.

 http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-10/msg00059.html

=head2 Attribute::Handlers: our vs my

Jos Boumans reported a bug in the handling of attributes with our and my.
Richard Clamp explained why C<my> attributes are handled at execution time and
C<our> at compile time.  But there may still be something amiss:

 http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-10/msg00105.html

=head2 In brief

Abigail added TODO functionality to one of the core-test internal dialects of
Test::xxx.

Robin Barker found an oddity when using perl -V:'?flags'.  The C<?> makes it
possible to search for any string, rather than the ones anchored to the
beginning (because it makes the /^ optional).

=head2 About this summary

This week's summary was produced by Elizabeth Mattijsen. Summaries are
published weekly on F<http://use.perl.org/> and on a mailing list, which
subscription address is perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org. Corrections
and comments are welcome. Next week Rafael will be taking the honours again.
