=head1 This Week on perl5-porters (31 March / 6 April 2003)

Patches, crashes, hashes and stash caches, these are a few of my favorite
things. If you like them, too, this week's P5P summary is for you !

=head2 Stash Cache

Arthur Bergman has the idea to use a cache to store symbol tables
(a.k.a. stashes) for class method calls, to avoid looking them up from the
package name each time they're invoked. He proposes a patch, with which
he observes an average 180% speed increase (on his system).

    http://archive.develooper.com/perl5-porters@perl.org/msg93974.html

=head2 Patches

Ilya Zakharevich submitted a load of patches to maintperl, some of them
related to the Perl port to OS/2, some of them more generic, to MakeMaker,
Net::Ping, Time::HiRes. He also posted some comments about the ithread
implementation in 5.8.0, and tried to have microperl working. (Look in
the perldelta manpage for perl 5.8.0 if you haven't heard about microperl
before.)

    http://archive.develooper.com/perl5-porters@perl.org/msg93848.html : threads goofs
    http://archive.develooper.com/perl5-porters@perl.org/msg93936.html : microperl

And that's not all. He also proposed to add built-in support for the
now-standard C<--help> and C<--version> switches to Getopt::Std. This is
followed by a discussion with Johan Vromans about extending this feature
to Getopt::Long.

    http://archive.develooper.com/perl5-porters@perl.org/msg93940.html

=head2 In brief

Alberto Accomazzi reports that perl 5.8.0, compiled with the
C<usemymalloc> configuration option, doesn't seem to be able to handle
more than 1GB of RAM. This being most probably due to an inner limitation
(although nobody commented on this).

    http://archive.develooper.com/perl5-porters@perl.org/msg94022.html

Bug #21765 is about split() not returning the desired kind of false/empty
value, when called in a specific assignment context. Yitzchak
Scott-Thoennes sent a fix. Demonstration here :

    http://archive.develooper.com/perl5-porters@perl.org/msg93876.html

Bug #21787 reports a problem with the C<fields> pragma. Michael Schwern
says that this looks like a bug which was just reported in Class:Fields,
which includes its own version of fields.pm.

Michael Schwern, busy on the MakeMaker front, asked how portable the
redirection construct C<< 2&>1 >> was, when used from inside the C<qx//>
operator. Apparently it's portable on platforms that provide a shell that
understands it, on OS/2 (that provides an emulation), and on VMS, but only
when the external command run by C<qx//> is perl.

Steve Hay provided several fixes to the installhtml utility, that
generates the perl standard documentation in HTML format, and that
was severely messed up.

Chip Salzenberg wonders, lonely, about the B<FIXME> comments that can be
found here and there in the sources.

Sadahiro Tomoyuki released new versions of Unicode::Normalize and
Unicode::Collate.

=head2 About this summary

This summary was brought to you by Rafael Garcia-Suarez. Weekly summaries
are available on L<http://use.perl.org/> and/or via a mailing list, which
subscription address is L<perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org>. Comments,
corrections, additions, and suggestions are welcome. Apologies to Rodgers
and Hammerstein.
