=head1 This Week on perl5-porters (28 July / 3 August 2003)

This week will undoubtedly be known to the future generations as the
two-release-candidate-week. Be the first to read about it. And don't miss
the other interesting parts : this week's summary is full of action,
suspense and bug fixes.

=head2 Release Candidates

Jarkko released perl 5.8.1 RC3 and 5.8.1 RC4.

RC3 announces the return of the hash randomisation : it's again turned on
by default.

In RC4 several modules were updated, notably MakeMaker and CPAN. The main
problem with RC3 was that the CPAN module was forcing to use
Module::Signature (to verify cryptographically signed modules), and this
feature wasn't tested enough. Moreover Module::Signature is not part of
the core. Autrijus Tang is working on better portability and integration
for Module::Signature, so it may become part of the core some day.

There was also some courteous fight about whether deprecating vstrings was
a good thing or not in 5.8.1, regarding backward compatibility. It's
apparently not finished yet (but Jarkko is until now keeping the
deprecation warnings turned on.)

    http://xrl.us/n78

=head2 Notes from the P5P BOF, and perl 5.6.2

Elizabeth Mattijsen posted the notes taken at the P5P meeting in Paris,
after YAPC::EU. Go read it, that's an interesting complement to this
summary.

    http://xrl.us/n79

One of the points discussed was the importance of a 5.6.2 release -- the
conclusion being that I<it's more important to release 5.6.2 than Sarathy
to be able to fix all his bugs>. Therefore, Sarathy transferred the 5.6
pumpkin to Rafael, who in turn posted plans for 5.6.2 (and perhaps 5.6.3).
A new branch was created in the perforce repository ; it's available like
bleadperl and maintperl via rsync (pathnames being F</perl-5.6.2> and
F</perl-5.6.2-diffs> for the patches) and via the APC. The goal of this
new release is mainly to fix the known problems to compile it on recent
systems ; for example, F<Configure> seems to produce no makefile on Mac OS
X with a case-insensitive filesystem.

    http://xrl.us/n8a

=head2 To packagers

The DESTDIR variable is now honored by C<make install>, to specify a
prefix to all installation paths. This should please RPM package
maintainers, thanks to Michael Schroeder. See the F<INSTALL> file for
details.

=head2 STDOUT reopened

Chris Nandor complains that opening a file for reading when STDOUT has
been just closed emits a warning : I<Filehandle STDOUT opened only for
input>. That's because the newly opened filehandle gets the file
descriptor number of STDOUT (which is 1). As the file descriptors are
actually allocated by the C-level system call API, and as STDOUT is always
the fd 1 by definition, there is no way to change this ; however, the
condition on which the warning is produced could be changed, if we could
agree on it.

    http://xrl.us/n8b

=head2 Still working on MakeMaker

Steve Hay and Michael Schwern were trying to solve a MakeMaker regression
that prevented libapreq to build correctly on Windows XP with VC++ 6.0.
Apparently the problem comes from a hackish workaround for a now-solved
MakeMaker bug in the libapreq sources (MakeMaker wasn't handling recursive
makes correctly.) Michael fixed other bugs as well. As of this writing,
the latest release of MakeMaker on CPAN is 6.13^W14^W^W^W 6.15.

=head2 In Brief

Dave Mitchell found and fixed a utf8+regex regression bug in 5.8.1-RC2.
Abigail found another regex regression bug (#23171), that was fixed by Hugo.

When C<use File::Glob ':glob'> is enabled, calling twice the glob
angle-bracket operator may cause a segfault or a memory corruption error
(bug #23185). Marcus Holland-Moritz found out that two incompatible
internals APIs were mistakenly used together, and provided a fix.

Michael Schwern notices that C<perldoc CPAN> gives the doc for the F<cpan>
script on Mac OS X, due to the case-insensitive filesystem. To get the
docs for the module, it's necessary to tell explicitly C<perldoc
CPAN.pm>.

Ed Avis finds that localization of C<$_> fails when it's aliased
to C<$1>. Bug #23141.

Stephen McCamant continues to improve B::Deparse.

Enache Adrian proposed tests for B::Bytecode and B::ByteLoader. They
weren't integrated into maintperl, though, due to potential instabilities.

Enache also fixed bug #23207, about chained calls to C<< ^= >> not
behaving properly.

Abe Timmerman released Test::Smoke 1.18.

Look, a spec for the F<META.yml> file ! (it may be a bit outdated though.)

    http://module-build.sourceforge.net/META-spec.html

=head2 About this summary

This week's summary was, as usual, written by Rafael Garcia-Suarez. Weekly
summaries are published on F<http://use.perl.org/> and on a mailing list,
which subscription address is L<perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org>.
Comments, corrections, additions, and suggestions are welcome.
