=head1 This Week on perl5-porters (10-16 November 2003)

For some reason, (maybe the approach of mod_perl 2), one of the main
topics this week was interpreter cloning and the problems it may cause.
But the release of perl 5.6.2 is an event that is not to be neglected.
Read on.

=head2 5.6.2

The latest episode in our maintenance series is perl 5.6.2, which was
released saturday. After the RC1 last week, some remaining bugs were
shaken out, and some of them solved. The announcement on P5P is here :

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-11/msg00713.html

Perl 5.6.3 will eventually be a more advanced release, including a load
of bugfixes and module upgrades (while 5.6.2 is merely oriented toward
fixing compilation issues.)

=head2 Cloning problems

Bug #24463 reports that a DBI test is failing under perl 5.8.2-ithreads
built with debugging capabilities (-DDEBUGGING). This is due to a
regression in the cloning of interpreters, that was introduced to fix a
segfault when using the C<-D> switch to perl. The problem here is that the
new interpreter that is being cloned hasn't yet perlio layers, and thus
can't use print debug messages ; but trying to set the context back at the
perlio layers of the pristine interpreter leads to this breakage.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-11/msg00509.html

Stas Bekman reported that C<Config::myconfig()> is prone to fail with a fatal
error under ithreads, with perl 5.8.[12], due to its internal use of a
C<:unique> variable (made readonly when a new thread is started).
Elizabeth provides a fix. (It appears that mod_perl 2 is a great tool to
find thread-related bugs.)

Stas reported also another problem with C<Scalar::Util::weaken()> : clones
of weak scalars are messed up. This happens since perl 5.8.1.

Following to another question by Stas about the CLONE method, Elizabeth
introduced her module C<Thread::Bless>.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-11/msg00643.html

=head2 Empty subroutines

Elizabeth Mattijsen notices that using an empty subroutine as a method may
produce segfault in some specific cases with perl 5.8.2. Enache Adrian
provides a fix.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-11/msg00461.html

=head2 C++ bindings

Chip Salzenberg reports as bug #24468 that the headers of perl 5.8.2, with
threading turned on, can't be compiled from within C++ sources. This is
a problem for C++ applications that embed perl. Jan Dubois suggests a
fix, which Chip is going to try.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-11/msg00550.html

=head2 In Brief

Nicholas Clark notices that creating threads in BEGIN blocks is
unsupported. He disapproves this constraint.

Nicholas also found and fixed obscure bugs with hashes and UTF8 keys. He
proposes to refactor some hash-handling code.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-11/msg00759.html

Alan Burlison notices that the MANIFEST.SKIP distributed with perl 5.8.2
(as part of ExtUtils::Makemaker) is unfortunately broken. Rafael takes the
blame.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-11/msg00610.html

Nick Ing-Simmons suggests to investigate using mapfiles on Linux for the
compilation of perl. Alan Burlison nods.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-11/msg00599.html

A version of the IRIX compiler can't build perl 5.8.1 or 5.8.2 (bug
#24471). Rafael suggests it's a bug in the C preprocessor.

=head2 New modules

Andy Lester released Test::Harness 2.36. This version includes a
command-line utility, C<prove>, that can run individual tests. Its
inclusion into the core still causes a few unresolved problems.

    http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2003-11/msg00686.html

Michael Schwern released ExtUtils::MakeMaker 6.21, I<mostly to fix building
modules that call dir_target() or completely rewrite top_targets()>.

=head2 About this summary

This summary was brought to you by Rafael Garcia-Suarez. Weekly summaries
are available on L<http://use.perl.org/> and via a mailing list, which
subscription address is L<perl5-summary-subscribe@perl.org>. Feedback (and
patches) welcome.
