=head1 The Perl 6 Summary for the week ending 20030824

Another week, another Perl 6 summary. I'm running late writing this
and I don't care because I spent the bank holiday weekend at a folk
festival and didn't get back 'til Monday evening. 

Predictably enough, we'll start with the shenanigans in perl6-internals.

=head2 Timely Destruction: Luke Palmer's Scheme

The timely destruction meme just won't go away. This week Luke Palmer
suggested a possible improvement to Parrot's current scheme (Parrot
keeps a counter of 'eager' objects needing timely destruction, and
a language's compiler emits conditional C<sweep> opcodes at
appropriate points. In Perl's case, for instance, the conditional
sweeps would be triggered on scope exit, other languages may have
different requirements). 

Luke's scheme involves terminating the DOD (Dead Object Detection)
run if every outstanding eager object is found alive at any point in
the run. For added performance, there would also be a 'high priority'
flag on all objects. The idea is that the high priority flag could be
used to ensure that, during a sweep, the paths through the object
group that are likely to lead to an eager object get checked first,
hopefully ensuring that the C<sweep> gets terminated as quickly as
possible in the case where no eager objects need to be finalized.

The proposal was discussed, but I don't think anyone has gone so far
as to implement anything based on the scheme.

This discussion led Klaas-Jan Stol to ask what the heck timely
destruction was, anyway. This sparked a longish discussion, covering
what timely destruction is all about, why you'd want it, and why
having it could be problematic.

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20030817114814.GA5132%40babylonia.flatirons.org>

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=003401c365b1%248ac7ea00%240cf479d9%40cc101682a>

=head2 The String API

Benjamin Goldberg is concerned with 'a number of shortcomings in the
[string] API' and outlined the problems he sees, along with some
proposed improvements. Luke Palmer generally liked the ideas, but Leo
TE<ouml>tsch had concerns about some of Benjamin's proposals. The
discussion that ensued got fairly technical. (One of these days I'm
actually going to go and get my head properly around the details of
the various encodings and charactersets. And then I'll probably go
insane.)

Dan also thought that Benjamin was confusing language level strings
with low-level strings, and that this was a Bad Thing. He outlined the
difference between language level (PMC) and low-level (Parrot S
register) strings, and explained what each was appropriate for.

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=3F41A27A.2963844A%40hotpop.com>

=head2 Making the Perl 6 Compiler use Continuation Passing Style

Allison Randal sent in a patch to switch F<languages/perl6> -- Parrot's
(incomplete) Perl 6 Compiler -- over to using Continuation Passing
Style, which is a useful step in the right direction. Leo applied it.

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=rt-23368-62986.11.2858919704281%40rt.perl.org>

=head2 Fun with C<search_lex>

Jos Visser (who in an earlier post confided that he's working on
writing a parrot compiler back end for his personal 'computer
language personality disorder: Comal', and that he does this for
'therapeutical value') wants to generate some parrot code that is
capable of searching the lexical pads for the existence of a
lexical. His current code tries to look up a lexical and catches the
exception when the lexical doesn't exist, but this is apparently very
slow. So, he proposes an op, C<search_lex> which, instead of throwing
an exception, returns a null PMC if the lexical is not found. 

Leo TE<ouml>tsch wasn't convinced by the need for the op, but he is
looking into why the exception handling route is so slow (indeed, he
seems to have found the reason, now he's trying to fix it). 

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20030819141248.GO652%40jadzia.test.uzorg>

=head2 Syntax Highlighting

Inspired by Luke Palmer's cunning, core.ops parsing vim syntax
highlighter, Andy Bussey wrote something similar for the KDE Kate
editor. Now, if someone could modify F<pasm.el>, the Emacs
highlighting mode to use the autogeneration trick too...

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=rt-23430-63132.19.8912005357393%40rt.perl.org>

=head2 RFC: Constant PMCs and Classes

Leo TE<ouml>tsch kicked off a discussion of the handling of constants
within Parrot and proposed adding a bunch of functions for creating
constant strings (symbols?) within the core. He also proposed a
system for creating constant classes. In the ensuing discussion I
think the proposals for strings were pretty much accepted, but it's
not yet known if the proposal for constant classes is quite the
Right Thing.

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=3F4363FF.2010204%40nextra.at>

=head2 Should Tom Locke target parrot?

Tom Locke is about to start on a project to create a new language and
wondered if Parrot might be a good target VM for him. In short, we
think so. But we would, wouldn't we?

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20030820155804.91449.qmail%40onion.perl.org>

=head2 More fun with set/assign

The semantics of C<set> in Parrot are, somewhat complex. Leo
TE<ouml>tsch showed a fragment of code which got a value from out of
a hash, set the fetched value to a new value and then printed out the
value from the hash. Depending on whether the original hash entry
existed or not, the fragment of code printed different things. He
wondered if things shouldn't be fixed to make it print the same thing
each time. Consensus has not yet been reached.

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=3F44EA28.6060105%40nextra.at>

=head2 Registers vs. Stacks

Tom Locke reopened the register or stack machine can of worms. He
even offered to recan them afterwards (by writing up the discussion
for adding to the FAQ). In particular, he wanted to know what we
thought Miguel de Icaza meant when he claimed that Parrot was "based
on religion". Klaas-Jan Stol pointed us at Dan's blog where he'd
addressed this issue some time ago.

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20030821160342.96490.qmail%40onion.perl.org>

L<http://www.sidhe.org/~dan/blog/archives/2003_05.html>

=head2 Weak References

Benjamin Goldberg hoped that Parrot would have some way of creating
Weak References, as he felt that they were probably a vital feature.
He outlined a scheme for implementing them. Various people disagreed
about their level of vitality. 

Dan pointed out that weak refs could be implemented with no special
core support beyond a general notification mechanism (which we're
getting anyway) and a weak reference PMC. Dan seemed to think that
this had already been discussed, but I confess that I can't remember
the discussion and, as Benjamin pointed out, it looks like Google
can't remember it either.

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=3F457174.9E6EDEA%40hotpop.com>

=head2 Print warning location

Leo kicked off a discussion of embedding debugging information (line
numbers, both for parrot code and the original high level code) in
parrot bytecode. Right now, only the slow core tracks lines within
the pasm file, and he wondered if using the C<-w> switch should
automatically force using the slow core.

Nobody actually answered that question, choosing to discuss the
various means of storing meta data about line numbers and the like in
the bytecode file. Consensus hasn't been attained yet, but I think
we're getting there.

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=3F45EAA3.4070900%40nextra.at>

=head2 WARNING: Incompatible changes to IMCC

As he warned some time ago, Leo has finally removed the 'feature'
whereby IMCC would parse code it found outside of subs. All IMCC code
must now be contained in C<.sub>/C<.pcc_sub>/C<.emit> blocks. If
you're writing code that doesn't behave properly, please fix it.

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=3F48820B.4050103%40nextra.at>

=head2 Program exit status

Leo noted that Parrot programs get commandline info passed in in P0,
but there is currently no way for a parrot program to communicate an
exit status to the shell. Leo offered up 3 different possibilities
for fixing this and asked for comments. Dan came up with a 4th option
involving a status PMC. Discussion is ongoing.

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=3F488ED1.7000802%40nextra.at>

=head1 Meanwhile in perl6-language

There were all of 6 messages. Gordon Henriksen moved the set/assign
discussion over from perl6-internals, asking for clarification of
what various bits of Perl 6 should do. Essentially it boils down to
'when should Perl 6 autovivify?'. The discussion is ongoing. 

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=C7E8652A-D516-11D7-8481-000502994722%40mac.com>

=head1 Next Week in the Perl 6 Summary

=over

=item *

The perl6-language list will erupt in a massive discussion of the
meaning of C<my Dog $spot>

=item *

Leo TE<ouml>tsch will post precisely no patches to Parrot

=item *

Dan will finish up the objects implementation

=item *

Leon Brocard will say something on one of the lists

=item * 

Damian will release Perl6::Rules

=item *

Your summarizer will have written some real Perl code and released
the code he talked about in Paris

=back

=head1 Acknowledgements, Announcements and Apologies

Does anyone want to buy a four bedroomed house in Newark upon Trent, dating
back to the late 16th century? The house is on the market, Gill's
term starts on September 15th and so far the Estate Agents haven't
sent any prospective buyers. Well, at least it gives me time to write
the summary.

Check out L<http://pc1.bofhadsl.ftech.co.uk:8080/> for more of my
writing (and thanks to those who have already popped by).

As ever, if you've appreciated this summary, please consider one or
more of the following options:

=over 

=item *

Send money to the Perl Foundation at
L<http://donate.perl-foundation.org/> and help support the ongoing
development of Perl.

=item *

Get involved in the Perl 6 process. The mailing lists are open  to
all. L<http://dev.perl.org/perl6/> and L<http://www.parrotcode.org/>
are good starting points with links to the appropriate mailing lists.

=item *

Send feedback, flames, money, requests for consultancy, photographic
and writing commissions, or a dual-processor G5 with 23" Cinema
Display to L<p6summarizer@bofh.org.uk>

=back