=head1 The Perl 6 Summary for the week ending 20031116

Evening all. Are you sitting comfortably? Then I'll begin.

Undoubtedly, over the last week, some or all of the following happened:

=over

=item *

Dan Sugalski thought about design, and maybe even nailed a few more
things down.

=item *

Leo TE<ouml>tsch wrote far more code than you'd think possible.

=item *

Luke Palmer either answered or asked a tough question or two on
perl6-language.

=item *

A series of unfortunate events, involving a laptop failing twice in
short order and an external firewire drive that decided that 'Write
once, read once' was a sensible operating mode, and a general lack of
an adequate backup regime, mean that I have lost my mail archive, my
summary archive, the tools I use to publish them and, most
devastatingly, a week's worth of new mail that I'd not got 'round to
reading or replying to yet. Which means I'm not really in a position
to write the usual summary this week. I I<could> head off to Google,
wrestle with an interface that really isn't suited to reading mail and
knock something together that wasn't too awful, but I'm going to punt
instead. Hopefully I'll have things vaguely sane next week and I'll
see about doing a double summary. 

=back

=head1 Acknowledgements, Apologies, Announcements

I'm sorry I was stupid enough to think "I'll muddle through without a
backup system, there's nothing of real value on the laptop...".

If you've enjoyed this summary then I'm amazed, but thank you
anyway. You might like to show your appreciation by thinking about
contributing money or time to the Perl foundation and the Perl 6
effort, or you could contribute feedback to me at
L<p6summarizer@bofh.org.uk> or stop by at my website, which has a
small amount of new content on it at last.

L<http://donate.perl-foundation.org/> -- The Perl Foundation

L<http://dev.perl.org/perl6/> -- Perl 6 Development site

L<http://www.bofh.org.uk:8080/> -- My website, "Just a Summary"
