=head1 The Perl 6 Summary for the week ending 20030914

Welcome to this week's Perl 6 Summary. And what better way could there
be of spending the morning of your 36th birthday than by reading through
a bunch of old messages in a couple of mailing lists and boiling them
down into a summary?

Hmm... you have a point. Still, I'd just spend the day feeling
slightly guilty if I did that. And I'd spend more than just the day
feeling guilty if I did that, but thanks for the offer.

Ahem.

Continuing the thread of "So little was said we might as well get it
over with and move onto the meat of the week", we'll start this week
with the language list.

=head2 Dispatch on context

Piers Cawley wondered about doing multiple dispatch based on context
and came up with a scheme which involved wrapping multimethods in a
simple method that would 'reify' context so that it could be used as
a multimethod argument. Luke Palmer came up with a better notation
for handling class arguments to multimethods than Piers's
suggestion...

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=m2ad9f3d45.fsf%40huge.bofh.org.uk>

=head2 Next Apocalypse

In a transparent (and successful) attempt to generate some traffic on
the language list, Jonathan Scott Duff wondered when the next
Apocalypse was due. (If anyone's reading this who isn't up to speed
on the Perl 6 design process, Apocalypses are Larry's design
documents which describe the syntax and semantics of Perl 6. In
theory they reflect the structure of I<Programming Perl>, but the
order may vary slightly).

Dan Sugalski popped up with an answer "Not for a while". The thing
is, the next Apocalypse is objects, and judging by the amount of time
it took Dan to get object internals finalized (hah!) over on
perl6-internals, getting objects right in Perl 6 is going to take a
time. Dan thought that Damian may well get Exegesis 7, formats, out
sooner. (Apocalypse 7 boiled down to the following: "See
Damian"). However, Damian is currently on holiday for the first time
in too long, Dan hoped (and I agree) that Damian wouldn't answer
for a few weeks.

There was general agreement that getting objects right deserved as
much time as it needed. Luke Palmer dropped a few hints though (and
made your summarizer happy by noting that 'the standard library will
definitely be mutable at runtime'. 

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20030909195935.GA12981%40lighthouse.tamucc.edu>

=head2 Macro arguments themselves

Alex Burr responded to a question about Macro arguments that Luke
Palmer posed on the second of August (you have to love the dizzying
pace of life on perl6-language). Alex suggested the partial evaluation
might be handy but predicted that nobody will write a useful partial
evaluator for Perl 6 as the language is 'simply too big'. The thread
went on to discuss ways of getting at syntax trees from precompiled
code and whether or not Alex had been serious in his prediction.

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=4a2pti6f1vl.fsf%40x-cbga-03.eu.broadcom.com>

=head2 Meanwhile, in perl6-internals

=head2 Of AST And YAL

At the back end of last week, Leo TE<ouml>tsch announced that he was
looking into the AST (Abstract Syntax Tree) interface to Parrot by
implementing parts of Yet Another Language (YAL). What's been done so
far looks remarkably impressive, and Leo wondered whether to commit
the changes. He noted that the work was currently totally standalone
and could be distributed as a tar file instead. 

Michal Wallace liked it, noting that he'd like to merge in all the
pirate code generation stuff. James Michal DuPont suggested using the
redland RDF API, and representing the syntax trees with RDF. Not
being a fan of XML (Who is?) Leo was unconvinced, worrying that he
wasn't keen on having an external library in such a central place in
Parrot. James pointed out that RDF isn't necessarily XML, and that
the redland API wasn't quite the same as the redland library. 

Meanwhile, Leo put a YAL distribution up on his web page.

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=3F5B5EA9.7090102%40nextra.at>

L<http://toetsch.at/yal/>

=head2 vtable->dump

The "How to do serialization right" thread rumbled on. Threads
continue to make things hard.

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20030907232125.C4286%40plum.flirble.org>

=head2 Parrot Z-Machine 

Amir Karger continued his investigation of what would be needed to
get Parrot emulating the Z-machine. Later in the week he announced
that he was about to start coding. Go Amir!

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20030907043016.59097.qmail%40web40703.mail.yahoo.com>

=head2 Moving IMCC

Everyone admits that F<languages/imcc> is the wrong place for
something as central to Parrot as IMCC. Leo wants to make a top-level
F<imcc> directory. Dan wants to move the current top-level C code to
a F<core> directory and move the IMCC stuff into that directory as
well (without an F<imcc> subdirectory). Quite what the Right Thing is
hasn't yet been decided so IMCC remains in the wrong place. Robert
Spier thought that we should wait 'til after the next Parrot release
anyway. 

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=3F5C7509.9080108%40nextra.at>

=head2 Leon Brocard Speaks!

Leo TE<ouml>tsch noted that there appeared to be a few ops missing,
for instance there are C<neg_p_p>, C<neg_i_i>, and C<neg_i> ops but
no C<neg_p>, he wondered if the 'missing' ops should be implemented or
simply worked around. Leon Brocard thought that implementing the
missing ops was the best course as it made it much easier to target
Parrot. He noted that we could always move the logic into the
assembler later if we decide to prune ops. Dan agreed. Leo set about
implementing, throwing up the occasional question about semantics. 

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=3F5CD9B1.4060701%40nextra.at>

=head2 FEATURE FREEZE

As of Sunday 14th, Parrot is feature frozen in preparation for the
next Parrot release. We're not sure whether this will be 0.1.0 or
0.0.11, but there's definitely a release coming soon. Steve Fink, who
reserves the right to call it the "hairy tulip" release, nevertheless
invited suggestions for release codenames. 

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20030909054344.GD3328%40foxglove>

=head2 Luke's Timely Destruction Scheme

Luke Palmer released the second revision of a patch implementing his
proposed timely destruction scheme. He claimed that in his benchmarks
he was seeing a 1000% speedup for lazy DOD runs, which can't be
bad. Dan, Leo and Daniel Grunblatt all asked Luke for his benchmark
programming, suggesting that it go in the F<examples/benchmarks>
directory. Dan also asked for Luke to have a go at writing a good
torture test for the system. Assuming it survived the torture test,
Dan thought we could commit the changes.

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20030910045232.GA17779%40babylonia.flatirons.org>

=head2 File Spec

Vladimir Lipskiy posted a patch implementing a new variant of File
Spec for the Parrot internals. (File Spec is a method of decoupling
file paths from the gory details of particular operating system
interpretations of what a file path looks like). It seems from the
subsequent discussion that Vladimir and Michael Schwern have a
fundamental disagreement about how a File Spec module should work.

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=002501c37835%24eadba990%24b19d943e%4087w5ovc8gmxcahy>

=head2 Embedding interface to PMCs

Arthur Bergman, the Ponie Jockey asked if there was any documentation
or code extant to help him figure out how to use PMCs in embedded
mode. Apparently there isn't. 

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=11E0C1CC-E473-11D7-98CB-000A95A2734C%40nanisky.com>

=head2 Win32 Tinder suggestions

Dan is in the process of setting up the TPF Win32 tinderbox
machine. However, he's not a windows person at all, so he solicited
suggestions as to which particular build options would make useful
tinderboxes. Melvin Smith offered up several suggestions of compilers
etc. 

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=Pine.LNX.4.44.0309111451250.29895-100000%40redcap.sidhe.org>

=head2 The P6E challenge!

In the Win32 Tinder thread, Dan told Melvin Smith (and by extension
everyone else) that "it's your job, if you choose to accept it, to
help make [Perl 6 Essentials] horribly out-of-date." Nicholas Clark
wondered if there would be prizes for people who make the most
paragraphs obsolete, and if anyone was counting. (It looks like
Nicholas just volunteered). Dan reckoned that yes there would be a
prize, the winner would get a mention in the forward of the next
version, but he wasn't sure whether that would include a signed copy
of the new version or a hand corrected copy of the old
one... Nicholas voted for the hand corrected copy, and I second that
suggestion. 

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=Pine.LNX.4.44.0309111513150.29895-100000%40redcap.sidhe.org>

L<http://www.ccl4.org/~nick/P/p6ee++.jpeg> -- Hand correction #1

=head1 Acknowledgements, Announcements, Apologies

I'm afraid I still don't have the info about the Perl Foundation's
Parrot related grants. I'll nudge Gav and hopefully have something
for you all next week. 

I promise there will be new content at
L<http://www.bofh.org.uk:8080/> this week. 

As ever, if you've appreciated this summary, please consider one or
more of the following options:

=over 

=item *

Send money to the Perl Foundation at
L<http://donate.perl-foundation.org/> and help support the ongoing
development of Perl.

=item *

Get involved in the Perl 6 process. The mailing lists are open  to
all. L<http://dev.perl.org/perl6/> and L<http://www.parrotcode.org/>
are good starting points with links to the appropriate mailing lists.

=item *

Send feedback, flames, money, requests for consultancy, photographic
and writing commissions, or the secret of eternal youth to
L<p6summarizer@bofh.org.uk>

=back

Right, I'm off to enjoy the rest of my birthday. See you all next
week.