=head1 The Perl 6 summary for the week ending 20030216

Welcome to the all new, entirely unaltered, all singing, all dancing
Perl 6 summary. Your beacon of reliability in the crazy world that is
Perl 6 design and development.

Another quiet week. Even quieter than last week in fact, unless my
mail spent some of the time up the spout, but I don't think so.

So, as is traditional, we kick off with perl6-internals

=head2 CGP - The Computed Goto Prederefed Runloop

Last week I mentioned that nobody seemed to have commented on Dan's
bet with Guido van Rossum that Parrot would outperform Python by OSCON
2004. (I also missed the fact that the penalty for losing the bet now
involves cream pies as well as $10 and a round of drinks...). After I
posted the summary to the mailing lists, Leopold TE<ouml>tsch informed
me that he had commented indirectly by announcing his new, improved,
ludicrously quick runloop that combines computed GOTOs and
predereferencing. Whatever that means. 

This week, Leo and Nicholas Clark worked out how to combine the
blistering pace of the JIT core (for operations that had been
translated into hand hacked machine code) with the blistering pace of
the CGP runloop (for the other ops). As far as I can tell, this
involved turning the idea 'inside out', the VM actually starts up
running JIT compiled code and calls out to the CGP core to execute
non-JITable sequences of ops. The numbers for this approach look
fantastic (quite stunningly quick...) So Leo checked it in.

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=3E48C71A.2090708%40toetsch.at>

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=3E4BBD29.7060307%40toetsch.at> -- Some numbers

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=3E4CEF66.7020900%40toetsch.at> -- Check in notice

=head2 Optimized runloops and threading issues

Last week we were reminded that JIT and Predereferenced runloops don't
work in a threaded environment. This week Jerome Vouillon pointed out
an approach that looks like it could fix that (it seemed to convince
Leo). Dan (possibly playing mail catchup) said he was okay with having
to fall back to the old fast core (as opposed to the current, stupidly
fast core) in the presence of threads, but Leo seem to think that,
using Jerome's scheme we'll be able to have our cake, eat it and still
throw the cream pie at the Python team. Huzzah!

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20030214133916.GA19119%40strontium.pps.jussieu.fr>

=head2 C<keyed_int> issues

Leo TE<ouml>tsch had wondered about why 
C<< {get,set}_<type>_keyed_int >> vtable methods needed to take an C<INTVAL*>
value instead of a plain C<INTVAL> as it introduced some possibly unneeded
conditional code, a stack variable for the key and made life hard for
JIT code. It looks like the pointer is a holdover from an early
approach to doing multidimensional keyed structures. 

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=3E4B76E8.2040509%40toetsch.at>

=head2 Changes to the calling convention and other fallout

Dan returned from the Sebastapol Perl 6 meeting with a few
announcements and one change in the parrot calling convention (how
many calling conventions have we had now?). 

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=a05200f00ba72cc9686b5%40%5B63.120.19.221%5D>

=head2 Macro support in IMCC

JE<uuml>rgen BE<ouml>mmels announced that he'd implemented macro
expansion in IMCC (Yay JE<uuml>rgen!). Leo liked it, but requested a
few changes before he'd check it in, so hopefully, some time soon the
mainline IMCC will have macros, which is very nice.

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=rt-21033-51310.14.4462403001212%40bugs6.perl.org>

=head1 Meanwhile, in perl6-language

Almost all the discussion was about the difference between arrays and
lists. Deborah Ariel Pickett came up with a good list of questions
about arrays and array references in scalar and list contexts, which
Michael Lazzaro answered (very neatly I thought) with a list of their
different contextual behaviours. Deborah extended Michael's list to
hashes and hashrefs in a reasonably obvious way. Smylers came up with
a possible new sigquote (after paraphrasing): "We should limit new
features to those that arise from a desire for the functionality
rather than a desire to use up 'spare' syntax". (Okay, it's not
exactly I<snappy>, but I think it's important).

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=200302120056.h1C0uaec026963%40bruce.csse.monash.edu.au> -- Deborah's questions

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=90876177-3EB9-11D7-A9B7-00050245244A%40cognitivity.com> -- Michael's answers

And that wraps it up for the language list. I'm sure it'll pick up
again soon though. There are rumours of a draft apocalypse in the next
couple of weeks, and presumably that implies a real apocalypse soon
after. Assuming we haven't had another kind of Apocalypse in the mean
time. 

=head1 Announcements, Acknowledgements and AnotherWordBeginningWithA

This week's summary was again prepared in the comfy chair with
surprisingly few distractions apart from the late arrival of mail from
Leon Brocard announcing that he'd implemented a brainf*ck compiler in
brainf*ck, but that didn't really happen this week so I've got no
excuse for mentioning Leon's name in this summary. 

Thanks to everyone who dropped us a line about our American Odyssey;
I'm hoping I'll have one of those web page things up at some point
with a rough itinerary in case anyone wants to come and throw rotten
tomatoes at me (or, preferably, buy me sushi).

Proofreading services were again down to Aspell and me. 

If you  appreciated this summary, please consider one or more of the
following options:

=over

=item *

Send money to the Perl Foundation at
L<http://donate.perl-foundation.org/> and help support the ongoing
development of Perl.

=item *

Get involved in the Perl 6 process. The mailing lists are open  to
all. L<http://dev.perl.org/perl6/> and L<http://www.parrotcode.org/>
are good starting points with links to the appropriate mailing lists.

=item *

Send feedback, flames, money, job offers or 17 inches of aluminium
goodness to L<p6summarizer@bofh.org.uk>

=back

This week's summary was, once more, sponsored by Darren Duncan. Thanks
Darren. If you'd like to become a summary sponsor, drop me a line at
L<p6summarizer@bofh.org.uk>.
