=head1 The Perl 6 Summary for the week ending 20030831

Welcome to this week's Perl 6 summary. This week, for one week only
I'm going to break with a long established summary tradition. No,
that doesn't mean I won't be mentioning Leon Brocard this week. Nope,
this week we're going to start by discussing what's been said on the
perl6-language list this week.

Now that's out of the way, we'll continue with a summary of the
internals list.

=head2 Continuation Passing is becoming the One True Calling Style

Jos Visser had some code that broke in an interesting fashion when
C<find_lex> through an exception, so he asked the list about it. Leo
TE<ouml>tsch explained that exceptions and old style subs don't play
at all well together. It seems to me that the total and utter
deprecation of subs using the old style calling conventions is not
far distant.

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20030825090032.GG1125%40jadzia.ao.abnamro.nl>

=head2 Embedding Parrot in Perl

Luke Palmer has started to learn XS in the service of his project to
embed Parrot in Perl. Unsurprisingly, he had a few questions. He got
a few answers.

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20030825164459.GA14410%40babylonia.flatirons.org>

=head2 Implementing ISA

Leo TE<ouml>tsch has implemented C<isa>. The unfashionably lowercased
chromatic argued that what Leo had implemented should actually be
called C<does>. Chris Dutton thought C<does> should be an alias for
C<has>. Piers Cawley thinks he might be missing something. 

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=3F4A582C.9030200%40nextra.at>

=head2 More on constant PMCs and classes

Leo TE<ouml>tsch's RFC on constant PMCs and classes from last week
continued to attract comments about possible interfaces and
implementations. 

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=3F4363FF.2010204%40nextra.at>

=head2 A miscellany of newbie questions

James Michael DuPont a bunch of questions and suggestions about
bytecode emission, the JIT and about possibly extracting the Parrot
object system into a separate library. Leo supplied answers.

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20030826142908.48488.qmail%40web41507.mail.yahoo.com>

=head2 What the heck is active data?

Dan clarified what he'd meant when he talked about Active Data. His
one sentence definition being '"Active Data" is data that takes some
active role in its use -- reading, writing, modifying, deleting or
using in some activity'. The consequences of such data are far
reaching; even if your code has no active data in it, Dan points out
that you still have to take the possibility into account, or solve
the halting problem. 

Benjamin Goldberg seemed to think that you didn't need to solve the
halting problem, you could just add scads of metadata to everything
and do dataflow analysis at compile time. I look forward with interest
to his implementation.

Matt Fowles wondered why active data necessitated keyed variants of
all the ops, asking instead why we couldn't have a C<prepkeyed> op to
return an appropriate specialized PMC to use in the next op. Dan
agreed that such an approach was possible, but not necessarily very
efficient. Leo TE<ouml>tsch disagreed with him though.

TOGoS wondered if this meant that we wouldn't know whether C<set Px,
Py> did binding or morphing until runtime. (It doesn't. C<set> always
simply copies a pointer). In an IRC conversation with Dan we realised
that some of this confusion arises from the fact that C<set_string>
and friends behave as if they were called C<assign_string>; to get
the expected C<set_string> semantics you'd have to do:

    new Px, .PerlUndef
    set_string Px, "some string"

Hopefully this is going to get fixed.

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=a0521060ebb71b3c71432%40%5B63.120.19.221%5D>

=head2 Mission haiku

=begin html 

<blockquote>Nicholas Clark<br/>
To make some kind of mark<br/>
Committed haiku.<br/>
Don't you.</blockquote>

=end html

=begin text

Nicholas Clark
To make some kind of mark
Committed haiku.
Don't you.

=end text

Yes, I know that's not a haiku. It's a Clerihew. I suggest that
anyone else who feels tempted to perpetrate verse on list restrict
themselves to a sestina or a villanelle, or maybe a sonnet.

I also note that POD is a lousy format for setting poetry in.

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20030828001111.O4286%40plum.flirble.org>

=head2 JE<uuml>rgen gets De-Warnocked

JE<uuml>rgen BE<ouml>mmels had been caught on the horns of Warnock's
Dilemma over a patch he submitted a while back. It turns out that he'd
been Warnocked in part because both Leo and Dan thought he already had
commit rights. So that got fixed. Welcome to the ranks of Parrot
committers JE<uuml>rgen, you've deserved it for a while.

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=m2znhuksi3.fsf%40helium.physik.uni-kl.de>

=head2 Parrot Z-machine

New face Amir Karger wants to write the Parrot Z-machine
implementation and had a few questions about stuff. So far he's been
Warnocked. 

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20030828131707.8989.qmail%40web40705.mail.yahoo.com>

=head2 Notifications

Dan described how Parrot's notification system would work, and what
that means for weak references. Michael Schwern thought the outlined
notification system would also be awfully useful for debugger watch
expressions. Tim Bunce worried about some edge cases.

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=a05210614bb743d52fe3f%40%5B63.120.19.221%5D>

=head2 MSVC++ complaints

Vladimir Lipskiy (who's been doing some stellar work recently on
various build issues amongst other things) found some problems trying
to build Parrot with MSVC++ and asked for help in working out how to
fix them. JE<uuml>rgen BE<ouml>mmels suggested a fix, which Vladimir
liked in principle, but noted that there were still some issues it
didn't quite fix.

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=007301c36dd1%247b68e410%24589d943e%4087w5ovc8gmxcahy>

=head2 C<< vtable->dump >>

Leo TE<ouml>tsch thought that, if only for debugging, it would be
really handy for PMCs to offer a C<dump> method which would return a
string representation of the PMC. Dan thought that a better approach
would be to get freeze/thaw working for PMCs and have the debugger
know how to dump a frozen PMC. This seemed to open up a whole big can
of worms as Leo, Dan and others discussed what was needed from the
serialization toolset and what its interface should look
like. 

Nicholas Clark threw a googly down the pitch with his description of
a possible attack on serialization schemes (possibly originating with
Jonathan Stowe) that seems deeply tricky to work around.

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=3F4F27B4.7070909%40nextra.at>

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20030830125952.S4286%40plum.flirble.org>

=head2 C<exit> opcode

Leo checked in a small change to Parrot, making C<exit> throw an
exception rather than simply quitting the program. Of course, unless
the exception is caught, parrot will exit anyway. He also proposed
changing the startup parameters by moving the ARGV array from P0 to
P5 for consistency with the Parrot Calling conventions. For some
reason this sparked off an enormous thread discussing how to return
from the main function. 

Dan liked the the idea, so Leo checked a patch in and fixed up as
many of the examples and languages as he could find, but he expects
that he hasn't caught 'em all.

L<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=3F4F390E.6080809%40nextra.at>

=head1 Acknowledgements, Announcements, Apologies

I'm really, really sorry about the Clerihew. But not sorry enough to
remove it.

Thanks to everyone involved in making sure I only got one and a
half of last week's predictions right. (The half prediction was to do
with my writing real Perl code, I didn't. But I I<did> release the
Paris code, you can find it on CPAN at
L<http://search.cpan.org/search?query=Heritable%3A%3ATypes&mode=dist>
if you're interested.)

Thanks to Gill for seven and 2 days (as I write this) of wedded
bliss. 

Check out L<http://pc1.bofhadsl.ftech.co.uk:8080/> for more of my
writing (and thanks to those who have already popped by).

As ever, if you've appreciated this summary, please consider one or
more of the following options:

=over 

=item *

Send money to the Perl Foundation at
L<http://donate.perl-foundation.org/> and help support the ongoing
development of Perl.

=item *

Get involved in the Perl 6 process. The mailing lists are open  to
all. L<http://dev.perl.org/perl6/> and L<http://www.parrotcode.org/>
are good starting points with links to the appropriate mailing lists.

=item *

Send feedback, flames, money, requests for consultancy, photographic
and writing commissions, or the soul of your first born to
L<p6summarizer@bofh.org.uk>

=back
